The Project Gutenberg eBook, Historical and Descriptive Sketches of the
Town and Soke of Horncastle [1820], by George Weir, Illustrated by Thomas
Espin


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: Historical and Descriptive Sketches of the Town and Soke of Horncastle
       [1820] in the county of Lincoln, and of several places adjacent


Author: George Weir



Release Date: December 31, 2020  [eBook #64182]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE
SKETCHES OF THE TOWN AND SOKE OF HORNCASTLE [1820]***


Transcribed from the 1820 Sherwood, Neely, and Jones edition by David
Price.





                        HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE
                                 SKETCHES
                                  OF THE
                              TOWN AND SOKE
                                    OF
                               HORNCASTLE,


                                  IN THE

                            COUNTY OF LINCOLN,

                              AND OF SEVERAL

                             PLACES ADJACENT,

                       EMBELLISHED WITH ENGRAVINGS.

                                * * * * *

                             BY GEORGE WEIR.

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:

         PUBLISHED FOR THE AUTHOR BY SHERWOOD, NEELY, AND JONES,
                             PATERNOSTER-ROW.

                   SOLD AT HORNCASTLE BY WEIR AND SON.

                                * * * * *

                                  1820.

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

                         Printed by Weir and Son,
                               Horncastle.




PREFACE.


THE Author of this volume has for several years past been induced from a
partiality to topographical research, to devote those hours which he
could spare from his professional avocations to an enquiry into the early
history of the town and neighbourhood of Horncastle.  The following pages
are the result of his labors, and he would have been glad to have laid
them before the public in a more perfect form; but from the difficulties
which he has had to encounter with in pursuing an untrodden path, he has
been enabled only to give them as “Sketches.”

It was the intention of the Author to have published this work five years
ago; but in this he was prevented by local circumstances, and has
subsequently been so by an unfavorable state of health.  He now submits
it to the public as the contribution of his mite towards the long
neglected topography of the county of Lincoln.

The Account of Tattershall having in a separate publication passed
through two editions, the original intention of the Author was not to
have included it in this volume; many of his Subscribers, however,
expressing a wish to the contrary, it is in compliance therewith now
subjoined.

The Author has to return his acknowledgements to those gentlemen who have
so kindly favored him with communications.  From Edmund Turnor, Esquire,
of Stoke Rochford, he received several useful notices; and to his friend
Mr. Richard Hill, lately of Islington, he is not only indebted for many
important communications, but for great assistance in the arrangement of
the work.  The principal part of the chapter on Geology is extracted from
“A Sketch of the Geology of the Lincolnshire Wolds, by Mr. Edward Bogg,”
published in the third volume of the “Transactions of the Geological
Society,” and the Author has to acknowledge the readiness with which Mr.
Bogg permitted him to make use of this valuable paper.  The list of
plants was furnished by Mr. John Ward, of Horncastle, and the modern plan
of the town by Mr. C. C. Cremer, of the same place; and to the accurate
pencil of Mr. Thomas Espin of Louth, the Author is indebted for several
of the views with which this volume is illustrated.  Without this
assistance he would not have been able to have combined in his work the
information which it at present contains.

April, 1820.




CONTENTS.

HORNCASTLE       Situation                                           1
                 During the Roman and Saxon Governments              3
                 The Manor                                           7
                 During the Civil Wars in the Reign of              12
                 Charles the First
                 Antiquities                                        25
                 The Church                                         29
                 The Grammar School                                 35
                 The River Bane and Navigable Canal                 37
                 The Present State of the Town                      39
SOKE OF HORNCASTLE                                                  43
                 Thimbleby                                          43
                 West Ashby                                         44
                 Low Tointon                                        44
                 High Tointon                                       45
                 Mareham on the Hill                                45
                 Roughton                                           46
                 Haltham                                            47
                 Wood Enderby                                       48
                 Moorby                                             48
                 Wilksby                                            48
                 Mareham le Fen                                     48
                 Coningsby                                          50
                 Langriville and Thornton le Fen                    53
BAUMBER                                                             55
EDLINGTON                                                           57
SOMERSBY                                                            59
SCRIVELSBY                                                          62
BOLINGBROKE      Situation                                          67
                 The Manor                                          67
                 The Castle                                         71
                 The Church                                         73
                 The Town                                           74
REVESBY                                                             76
KIRKSTEAD                                                           80
TATTERSHALL      Situation                                          83
                 The Manor                                          83
                 The Castle                                         86
                 The Collegiate Church                              88
                 The Town                                           95
TOWER ON THE MOOR                                                   97
GEOLOGY AND NATURAL HISTORY                                         99
APPENDIX                                                           107

PLATES.

Frontispiece, Roman Wall at Horncastle              to face the title.
North-East View of Horncastle Church                   to face page 29
Monument of Sir Lionel Dymoke                                       30
Plan of Horncastle in 1722, from “Stukeley’s                        39
Itinerarium”
Plan of Horncastle in 1819                                          40
South-West View of Tattershall Castle, with a                       86
Ground Plan
Chimney Pieces in Tattershall Castle                                88
Geological Map                                                      99

VIGNETTES.

Roman Urns found at Horncastle                                 page 25
Ancient British Coin                                                28
Seal of the Grammar School at Horncastle                            35
Seal of the Horncastle Navigation Company                           37
Stourton Hall, Baumber, Seat of Joseph Livesey, Esquire             55
Edlington Grove, Seat of Richard Samuel Short, Esquire              57
Ancient Cross at Somersby                                           59
Ancient Monuments in Scrivelsby Church                              62
Remains of Bolingbroke Castle, from a drawing taken in              67
1813
Revesby Abbey, Seat of The Right Hon. Sir Joseph Banks,             76
Bart.
Kirkstead Chapel                                                    80
Tattershall Church and Castle, from the South East                  83
Seal of Tattershall College                                         96
Tower on the Moor                                                   97




HORNCASTLE.


SITUATION, &c.


HORNCASTLE is pleasantly situated at the foot of that bold and even range
of hills which, from their openness, have been termed the wolds.  It is
nearly in the centre of the Lindsey division of the county of Lincoln,
and is the chief of a soke of fifteen parishes, to which it gives name.

The principal part of the town is built in an angle formed by the
confluence of two rivers, the Bane and the Waring, where an ancient
fortification formerly stood, the scite of which is still visible,
denoting it to have been a station of importance in early times.

The character of the place is however now completely changed.  From a
military station it has become a situation of trade; and being surrounded
by a considerable number of villages, possesses one of the largest
markets in the county.

Its distance from the city of Lincoln is twenty-one miles, and eighteen
from the town of Boston.



HORNCASTLE DURING THE ROMAN AND SAXON GOVERNMENTS.


BEFORE the invasion of Britain by the Romans, whilst yet the island was
divided into independent states, the present scite of Horncastle with its
immediate neighbourhood was doubtless appropriated, like the rest of the
country of the Coritani, to the pasturing of herds and flocks.  In the
formation of settlements no other circumstances influenced the Britons
than the conveniences which might be afforded them in their accustomed
occupations.  Vallies fertilized by streams, and the contiguous hills
would supply food for their cattle and sheep, whilst the neighbourhood of
forests invited to the pursuits of the chase.  The rich tracts of open
grass land stretching along the banks of the river Bane, and its
tributary stream, would be populously occupied by the pastoral
inhabitants of this district.  Hence it may be presumed, that when the
weak efforts of the Coritani for independence had left them vanquished by
the victorious arms of the Romans, under Ostorius Scapula, and finally a
tributary state by the more efficient achievements of Suetonius Paulinus,
this portion of the country was soon secured by fixing on the present
scite of Horncastle a military station.  From the almost imperishable
masses of the ancient wall which still remain, and by the numerous coins,
urns, and other vestiges of the Roman people which have been found in
this place, and are still met with in turning up the soil, it apparently
became in process of time a station of considerable importance.  It is
however difficult to make any definite suggestions as to the period at
which the fortifications might have been erected, no inscription having
been found throwing light upon the subject.

To secure by effectual barriers against insurrections, the conquests
which had already been made, whilst yet the bordering people to the
north, the fierce and powerful Brigantes, remained unsubdued, might be
deemed a sufficient inducement for raising frequent and effectual
military works among the inhabitants of this state: for it was not until
Petillius Cerealis was appointed by the emperor Vespasian to the command
in the province of Britain, that that hitherto unbridled nation were
either conquered or involved in all the calamities of warfare.  Though
there be no precise data by which the decision may be guided, as to the
time of the earlier military erections which were formed at this place;
yet it cannot be ascribed to a much later period than the above
occurrences so intimately connected.  At all events, it may not be
considered posterior to the effects which resulted from the wise policy
of Agricola.  Immediately on his arrival to assume the command, he placed
along the frontiers of the several subjugated districts, a chain of
fortresses: these were constructed with so much care and judgment, that
the inhabitants of those parts where the Roman arms had not then
penetrated, could never consider themselves secure from the vigor of the
conqueror. {4a}  The people, soon after this, completed their submission
to the yoke by yielding to the allurements of Roman manners.  Their
ferocity was tamed: from a savage people, running wild in woods, they
became cultivated, acquiring knowledge, and dwelling in towns; and
finally sweetened their slavery, by indulging in the pleasures of
polished life.

From the circumstance of this station being situated on the river Bane,
several antiquaries have concurred in fixing here the BANOVALLUM of the
Roman geographer Ravennas.  This opinion has been the more readily
adopted from the etymology of the name; the latter part of the word being
Latin, and collectively signifying a fortification on the Bane.  It is
indeed probable that the Romans might have been induced at first to make
a station at this place, from its convenient situation, easily rendered
defensible by a _vallum_, or temporary barrier, drawn across the aperture
of the two rivers from one bank to the other, and thence came its
designation.  Afterwards they built the indissoluble stone wall, whose
vestiges after the lapse of ages are manifest nearly the whole compass
round. {4b}  It is to be regretted that Ravennas gives no distances: he
merely places BANOVALLUM next after LINDUM, so that nothing decidedly
certain can be gained from his work.

But, though it cannot be positively ascertained that this spot was the
Roman BANOVALLUM; yet as the name most evidently points out a
fortification on the river Bane, there appears little reason to question
it; both from its contiguity to the colony of LINDUM, with which place it
had communication by means of a military road; {5} as also from its
situation; particularly as no other remains of the Romans have been
discovered on that river, nor yet any near to it, except some coins at
the village of Ludford, where the Bane has its source; and traces of an
encampment at Tattershall, more than a mile distant from its banks.

In what circumstances this station may have been involved from the final
subjugation of the Britons by Agricola, under whose paternal government
the province felt some portion of enjoyment in cultivating the arts of
peace, is not known: but, from the evidence of antiquities, it is
perceptible that it continued a place of importance down to the period
when the Romans in the decline of their empire had withdrawn from
Britain; though probably, in the security of a long abstraction from war,
its military strength was somewhat disregarded.  No sooner however had
the necessities and the mistaken policy of the enervated inhabitants,
again left to themselves, called to their assistance the warlike Saxons,
against the eruptions of the northern barbarians, than we find this place
agitated, in common with the rest of the country, by all the calamities
which were connected with the desperate contests that ensued;—the Britons
struggling for liberty, against the eagerness for dominion on the part of
the victorious Saxons.  These people, according to the practice which
prevailed amongst them of changing the names of Roman stations, gave to
this the appellation of HYRNCASTRE or HORNECASTRE, from its situation in
an angle formed by the junction of the two rivers, which denotes a
fortification in a corner, of which the present name is evidently a
corruption.

The Roman fortress was at that time either destroyed, or in a very
dilapidated state; for Horsa, the Saxon general and brother of Hengist is
stated to have enstrengthened the fortress of Horncastle.  This
fortification however did not continue long; for Horsa being defeated in
an engagement with the Britons, under the command of Raengeires, at the
neighbouring village of Tetford, Vortimer king of the Britons caused it
to be beaten down and rendered defenceless. {6}



THE MANOR.


BY the record called Domesday, compiled towards the latter end of the
reign of William the Conqueror, it appears that the manor of Horncastle,
previous to the close of the Saxon government, belonged to Editha the
queen of Edward the Confessor; but at the time of making that survey it
formed, together with the soke, part of the possessions of the king. {7a}

When this manor was separated from the crown does not appear; but in the
reign of Stephen it was the demesne of Alice or Adelias de Cundi, who
resided at her castle here, which leaves it to be concluded that she held
it by inheritance from her father. {7b}  As she took part against the
king in his contention with the Empress Maud, he seized her lands, but
restored them again on condition that she should demolish her castle, the
means which had served to render her political alliance formidable to his
interest. {7c}  What may have been the extent and nature of the structure
possessed as the mansion of Adelias is not now discoverable, no traces
being to be found; but its strength most probably consisted in a
restoration of the walls of the Roman fortress, which encircling some
convenient and less durable edifice, gave to the place of her residence
the security of a castle.

The restitution, by Stephen, of these lands to Adelias de Cundi, seems to
have been only for life, as her heir did not succeed thereto; for this
manor came again to the crown, and was afterwards given by Henry the
second to Gerbald le Escald, a Fleming, who held it for one knight’s fee.
{8a}  Gerbald le Escald, was succeeded by his grandson and heir Gerrard
de Rhodes; but for a short time after his death, Ranulph Earl of Chester
appears to have held it, probably in trust for Gerrard de Rhodes, during
his minority.  Gerrard was succeeded by his son and heir Ralph de Rhodes,
who in the reign of Henry the third, sold this manor to Walter Mauclerke,
the third Bishop of Carlisle, who also held the office of Treasurer of
the Exchequer.  In conformity with the spirit of the times in which this
sale was effected, the bishop and his successors were to hold the estate
by the performance of suit and service to Ralph de Rhodes and his heirs.
In the fourteenth year of the same reign, the transfer to Walter
Mauclerke was confirmed by the king, who in the same year also granted to
him three several charters, conferring those immunities upon the manor
and soke, which served to raise the town of Horncastle from the
dependence of a village, to become in some degree the mart of the
surrounding country.

The first of these charters gave to the bishop free warren over this
manor and the soke: the second the liberty of holding an annual fair at
this place, which was to commence two days before the eve of the feast of
St. Barnabas, and to continue eight days: the third had for its objects
the empowering of the bishop to try felons, {8b} and to hold a court
leet; also the exemption of the inhabitants of the manor, and the soke
from toll, and several other payments and services, beside protecting
them from arrest by the sheriff’s and king’s officers.  An additional
charter was granted in the following year enabling the bishop to hold a
weekly market here every Wednesday; and also another annual fair to
commence on the eve of the feast of St. Lawrence, and to continue seven
days. {8c}  The custom of holding a fair on the anniversary of this
festival appears to have prevailed at an earlier period, it being alluded
to in the grant of the former fair.

In the same reign, Gerrard, the son and heir of Ralph de Rhodes, appears
to have preferred his claim to this manor, which had been sold by his
father; {9a} perhaps in consequence of some omission in the performance
of those services by which the estate was to be held.  His claim does not
appear to have been successful; for in the seventeenth year of the same
king, the bishop fined to hold this manor in fee, but not to alienate
without licence. {9b}

Walter Mauclerke resigned the see of Carlisle in 1246, and as this manor
devolved to his ecclesiastical successors, it may be inferred that it had
been purchased to increase the revenues of the bishoprick, and not to be
appropriated as his private property.  The privileges of such essential
interest to the estate, which had already been conferred by the preceding
charters, were in part strengthened by fresh acknowledgements to the
Bishops of Carlisle, in the reigns of the two succeeding kings; Edward
the first confirming the grant of free warren, {9c} and Edward the second
that which exempts the inhabitants of the manor and soke from certain
payments and services. {9d}

At the period of Richard the second, Roger le Scrop and Margaret his
wife, with Robert Tibetot and Eve his wife, heirs and descendants of
Gerbald le Escald, appear to have advanced a claim to this manor, and to
have succeeded in obtaining letters patent, confirming to them homage and
service from the ecclesiastical possessor. {9e}  At that time also, when
the border contests had laid waste the see of Carlisle, and divested the
bishops of their seat of Rose Castle in Cumberland, they were
necessitated to take up their residence at Horncastle, which continued
for some time to be their principal place of abode. {9f}

In the twenty-fifth year of Henry the sixth, that monarch confirmed the
several charters granted to the bishops as lords of this manor, by Henry
the third, and also conferred on them numerous other privileges. {10a}

This manor continued in the possession of the Bishops of Carlisle, until
the reign of Edward the sixth, when, under the authority of a licence
from the crown, it was sold by Bishop Aldrich to Edward Lord Clinton,
who, during the time he held it, compounded with the copyhold tenants,
and enfranchised their estates; but after Mary had ascended the throne,
he was compelled to re-convey his purchase to the see of Carlisle, {10b}
to which, since that time, it has continued to belong.  Bishop Aldrich
died at this place in March, 1555, the second year of the reign of Queen
Mary: from which it appears, that the estate had either been restored
previous to his decease; or, in the conditions of the sale, he had
reserved to himself the privilege of residing in the manor house. {10c}

Queen Elizabeth had a lease of this manor from the then possessing
bishop, in which she was succeeded by James the first, who assigned it to
Sir Henry Clinton, knight; but owing to a neglect of enrolment, it proved
void. {10d}  The present lessee is The Right Honorable Sir Joseph Banks,
Baronet, by whom, and his ancestors, it has been held about a century.

The large tract of fen land, situated between this place and Boston, at a
very early period belonged to the lords of this manor, in conjunction
with the lords of the manors of Bolingbroke and Scrivelsby; but by the
grants which they gave to the neighbouring abbies at Revesby and
Kirkstead, their right therein became comparatively small. {11}  On the
enclosure of these fens, pursuant to Act of Parliament, in 1801, about
six hundred acres were annexed to the parish of Horncastle, eighty-one
acres of which were allotted to the lord of the manor; the remainder to
the owners of common-right houses.

The parochial extent of Horncastle, exclusive of the fen allotment, is
about one thousand three hundred acres, two hundred and fifty of which
are contained in the manorial estates.



HORNCASTLE DURING THE CIVIL WARS IN THE REIGN OF CHARLES THE FIRST.


NOTWITHSTANDING that in this part was born that individual of the family
of Plantagenet, whose assumption of the throne plunged the country, for
half a century, into the civil wars which nearly exterminated the ancient
nobility; yet had the soil here been unstained by the blood so profusely
shed.  Partaking, in common with all, the miseries of the land, it seemed
peculiarly exempted from beholding those contentions of the houses of
York and Lancaster which sprung from the elevation of Henry of
Bolingbroke to the sovereignty of England.  It was however otherwise when
the usurpation of unlimited power on the part of Charles the first had
urged a war between the people and the king.  As peculiar circumstances
of policy and interest had brought the military operations into these
parts, it will be necessary in their detail to revert to the conduct of
the parties opposed in the opening of the war.

No sooner had the commons demanded concessions from the royal
prerogative, as the only security against the repeated encroachments
which had been made on the privileges of the people, than they were
impelled, by the insincerity of the monarch, to protect the interest of
the subject by every possible means.  The right of the sword was looked
upon as the exalted claim of the patriot alone; but as either party
considered themselves influenced by the sacred love of their country,
both made gradual advances to an appeal: the one to protect the liberties
of the people; the other, those general interests which seemed connected
with upholding the authority of the king.  As the commons were sensible
that the monarch would seize the first favourable opportunity to
reinstate himself in the former excess of his power, the earliest
precautions were taken in regard to the military establishments of the
country.  Amongst these was secured the important fortress of Hull,
containing the arms of all the forces which had been levied against the
Scots: with these the parliament also assumed to themselves the disposal
of the militia, a force indeed collected, but totally untried in the
conduct of war.  The king, on erecting his standard, opposed to this, as
a resource of strength, his Commission of Array.  The call of the monarch
was obeyed by each county, as the political inclinations of individuals
led them, or in submission to the influence and example of those men of
fortune, with whose interests that of their tenantry was intimately
connected. {13}

The contest carried on in the south and in the west with vigor, already
appeared favorable to the royal cause.  In the north, however, it
sustained a decided check, by the strong hold which the parliament
possessed in the garrison of Hull, then commanded by Lord Fairfax, who,
unable to maintain the field against the Marquis of Newcastle, had there
retired, determined to repel a siege with courage and ability; and to
diminish the strength of his enemy by sudden incursions.

The disposable forces of the parliament, not immediately required for the
defence of Hull, were too inconsiderable to oppose the march into the
south.  Notwithstanding this, the affairs of the king were ruined by
confining the efforts of a powerful army to investing this fortress;
while the active enemy, though few in number, acquired by their boldness
and intrepidity, an effective strength in the field.  When Oliver
Cromwell, then beginning to signalize himself as the companion in arms of
the young and gallant Sir Thomas Fairfax, had by a signal victory at
Gainsborough, routed the royal troops; the Marquis of Newcastle,
beholding his brother Cavendish dead, amid the noblest and bravest of his
soldiers, seemed as if awakened by the calls of vengeance to the
necessity of more extensive exertions.  He therefore suddenly decided on
harassing his opponents, while weak and inefficient, by dispatching a
competent force into the heart of Lincolnshire.  Cromwell, though a
conqueror, was obliged to make a precipitate retreat; and as Lincoln was
not defensible, he hastened on the day succeeding his victory to Boston;
intending there, with the young Sir Thomas Fairfax, who was proceeding
with additional horse from Hull, to concentrate their forces with those
of the Earl of Manchester. {14a}

The division of the royal army, destined for these parts, was entrusted
to the command of Sir John Henderson, an old and valiant soldier, and to
Sir William Widdrington, who was appointed governor of Lincoln.  As these
leaders were anxious to requite themselves for the defeat which had so
recently crowned the conquerors with the applause of heroism, they
determined to draw the enemy to an engagement before their reinforcements
should arrive: ere this however could be effected, Manchester, upon
advice of their intention, after possessing himself of the strong
fortress of Lynn, had advanced with the disposable part of the army of
the associated counties.  Such appeared to be the mutual disposition of
affairs in the north, at the beginning of October 1643, in the first year
of the civil war.

The army of the parliament, about six thousand foot, and thirty-seven
troop of horse being concentrated at Boston, it was determined that
companies should be distributed into such parts as might secure their
early co-operation, whensoever occasion should require.  Bolingbroke,
defended by a castle held by the partizans of the king, called forth into
exertion their vigor and the alacrity of their courage. {14b}  This they
decided upon as the place of military operation; whilst as the
neighbourhood promised the most favorable circumstances for a field, they
would there invite the enemy on to battle.  Accordingly ten companies,
commanded by Major Knight, an officer under Sir Miles Hobart, were
disposed of at this place.  A regiment was quartered at Stickford, {14c}
about two miles distant; and three companies of the Earl of Manchester’s
own at the village of Stickney.  The cavalry were all distributed into
the country round, for about eight or ten miles distance.

In the evening after their arrival, the castle of Bolingbroke, was
summoned.  The answer in effect was, that “the commander need not expect
that the demands of arrogance alone should win the castle.”  From this
determined reply promising a strenuous defence, dispositions were
immediately taken to acquire it by a regular siege.  The church and a
neighbouring house were occupied by the assailants, earth works were
thrown up, and the assault commenced, but without much effect.

During this time, the royalists, bold, eager, and trusting that a
generous heroism would nerve them for victory, waited only the
opportunity for attack.  Upon learning the arrival of the Earl of
Manchester, they lost no time in drawing out all their military from the
several garrisons of Lincoln, Newark, and Gainsborough, still stimulated
by an undaunted resolution to find out the enemy and advance to the
combat.  Hastening on, they arrived, early on the day previous to the
battle, at the out-posts of the parliamentary forces.

No sooner had a detachment from the king’s army, advancing on the western
road, been observed at Edlington, reconnoitring the lines of their enemy,
than word came to Sir Thomas Fairfax, the commandant of the cavalry at
Horncastle, that a surprize was expected.  Information was accordingly
dispatched to the Earl of Manchester: it found him at East Kirkby hill,
with Colonel Cromwell, and the Lord Willoughby of Parham, intently
observing the progress which the besiegers made against the castle of
Bolingbroke, and assiduously ordering the dispositions of attack.  Roused
at this communication, Cromwell immediately hurried to collect the troops
dispersed around.  Fairfax was still every where distributing horsemen
for the purpose of enquiry, cautious to ascertain and forward such
accounts as might be obtained of the progress and number of the royal
forces; who though eager for battle, were careful to deliberate on the
promises of success.  As the party who caused the alarm, suspecting
themselves seen, had drawn off with such intelligence as they gathered,
there seemed reason to suppose that the main body of the royalists were
yet at a considerable distance: Fairfax therefore about sun set, learning
nothing additional, proceeded to the quarters at East Kirkby, to confer
on the measures proposed for the expected conflict.  In the mean time the
Earl of Manchester, with Lord Willoughby and some other officers, had
with the like object hastened to Horncastle, previously appointing that
at that place the forces should be immediately collected; where being
drawn together, the most effective resolutions might be taken for
ensuring a victory, or lessening the calamities of a defeat.

It was not until the dusk of the evening that the royal army, under Sir
John Henderson, moved rapidly on to the station of their enemy.  They had
judged that the dubious light would serve to conceal their true numbers;
and that as nothing was known of them with certainty, but their anxious
readiness for the encounter; so their opponents, whether few or many,
deeming them prepared for every casualty, might by their indecision leave
an easy conquest to their arms.

The out-posts were surprized by the precipitate advance of these hostile
forces; and in the unprepared circumstances of those who maintained them,
and the disparity of their numbers, there was afforded them no means of
encountering their difficulties, but the hardihood of a cool intrepidity.
This indeed was a stern calmness which always pervaded the breast of a
Puritan who was a soldier.  He did not untremblingly bare his bosom to
the steel because, like a Roman, he abstractedly considered fear
inconsistent with the nobler qualities of human nature; but because the
factitious enthusiasm of his religion had taught him to look with
indifference on temporal things.  If the general good required the
sacrifice of his life, the particular calamities of his family were
dismissed with scarce a thought beyond a pious supplication.  It was this
feeling which finally rendered the parliament victorious in their
contest.  However in this unlooked-for state the soldiers at the
out-posts were exposed to much perplexity, and many were the dangers
recited amongst them on the morning of the gathering of their strength
for the field of battle.  Some finding themselves surrounded,
out-numbered, and in all the perilous circumstances of desperate warfare,
were obliged to supply by politic conduct the helplessness of their
condition.  These therefore, hastily mounting their horses, agreed with
much resolution to break through the opposing ranks, sword in hand, with
the words of mutual encouragement, “Come on! come on! all is our own,”
thinking that the enemy, by these ambiguous shouts, fearing an ambuscade,
would leave to them an easy passage by the sudden confusion of their
alarm.  In this manner about four companies encountered two thousand
cavalry, with the loss of only three men.

Though these warriors, taking the advantage of the darkness of the
evening, were enabled by their resolute conduct to overcome these
difficulties; yet as the royal army had already advanced onward to
Horncastle, in strong and numerous detachments, they were exposed in
their retreat thither to fresh and obstinate encounters.  Perceiving, as
they approached the town, that they had come up to another party of the
enemy’s horse, they determined, after saluting them as friends, to hurry
onward as if destined for some urgent duty.  They had, however, scarce
passed them, when flushed with the success of their stratagem, and
feeling the pride and bravado of soldiers, who deemed their individual
preservation as of little value to their common strength, if purchased
without the blood of their enemy, they turned to the attack of the unwary
royalists.  “For whom are ye?” said they.  “For the king.”  “We are for
the king and parliament.”  Scarcely had these declarations been
interchanged, when rushing precipitately on the unsuspecting enemy, and
throwing them into disorder, they fled towards the town, deeming
themselves secure in the quarters of their comrades, and considering
their valour rewarded in the acclamations that would greet them from
their friends.  But Horncastle, surprized at the approach of numerous
hostile forces, had been evacuated by the detachment of horse which
possessed it; and the inhabitants, as soon as the town was seized by the
troops of the king, having secured the entrances and roads through it, by
forming barriers with carts and timber; the cavalry found themselves
again obliged to exert their unyielding valor in turning upon their
pursuers.  Desperately therefore they burst through them with the full
energy of their courage, sustaining the loss of some few men, among whom
was a cornet; but bringing away prisoners as the evidence of their perils
and their triumph. {17}

At this period of hurried confusion, and the setting in of the night, the
Earl of Manchester reached the town.  He heard the rejoicings of the
troops, thus victorious in the dangers of their retreat; taunting the
enemy with their shouts, as they drew off undefeated from their toils.
Finding now that the place designed for the assembling of his forces was
already possessed by the enemy, he hastily recalled the orders for the
general rendezvous at Horncastle, and appointed Bolingbroke in its stead.
Thither at night repaired the dispersed soldiery of the parliament,
except three or four troops of horse, who in the difficulties of
retreating before superior forces, had been obliged to proceed by the
circuit of Tattershall, and did not arrive until the next morning.

At Bolingbroke, Manchester designed to wait for the enemy; but Cromwell,
actuated by prudence, urged the delaying of the battle, since the troops,
upon whose prowess and exertion success depended, were wearied, and
little able to sustain the ardour of the fight. {18}  The royal army were
however too eager to secure the promises of a victory, to permit their
adversaries to renew their strength by avoiding the contest.  As soon as
the morning had dawned and the silence of the surrounding country assured
them that their enemies were withdrawn from near them, and were
assembling together at Bolingbroke, they arrayed themselves for the
encounter.  Before the middle of the day they marched out, in strength
about seventy-five troops of horse, and five thousand foot, to meet the
soldiers of the parliament.  Foreboding with certainty that this would be
their determination, Manchester was constrained to the resolution of
giving them battle, and immediately advanced towards them.

The spot upon which the contending armies engaged was a gently rising and
broadly extended eminence, at a village called Winceby, midway between
Horncastle and Bolingbroke.  It commands an extensive prospect of the far
stretched fen-lands of the county; whilst to the westward is seen those
cliffs, on the summit of one of which magnificently rises the cathedral
of Lincoln.  This the royal army had contemplated as a district, which by
victory was either to be restored to the authority of the king; or by
defeat to afford an effectual check to the military operations in the
north, and to be ensured as a further resource to the parliament.  The
noon was already passed when the armies came in sight of each other.  The
royalists trusting with confidence to their mutual ardor, rejoiced when
they beheld the adverse soldiers advancing to meet them, though amid the
wild chant of hymns for mercy and for victory.  In the fields immediately
before them they fixed the order of their battle: formed into closely
compacted lines, the cavalry was placed in the advance, and covered the
infantry.  The left wing of this array, was commanded by the general Sir
John Henderson. {19a}

The Earl of Manchester, pressed for ground in the marshalling of his
forces, presented alone his cavalry to the fight; the infantry, headed by
himself, being stationed so far in the rear that they were unable to
second the exertions of their horsemen. {19b}  The disadvantages arising
from fatigue, with the closeness of ground, and inequality of numbers
were apparent to the warriors of the parliament.  In the doubtful
promises of the contest, their leaders sought to replenish their
strength, and supply their situation by words and by actions, infusing
into them an energy and martial ardour rivalling their own.  Fairfax, who
knew by experience that the undaunted intrepidity of a few was more
efficient in its achievements than the impetuosity of those who relied
for security on their numbers, pointed to his men the imposing array of
his adversaries, exclaiming “Come let us fall on; I never prospered
better than when I fought with my enemies three or four to one.”
Cromwell, by the apparent bravery with which he was animated, promised
them that examples of heroism should not be wanted, whilst life was given
him to lead them. {19c}

On the other hand, the commander of the royal forces did not lose the
opportunity which was afforded him of reminding his fellow soldiers that
vengeance was yet due for the defeat at Gainsborough; and that now was
supplied them a time to requite themselves for the blood of the
illustrious brother of Newcastle.  He set before them the necessity of
strenuous exertions and important sacrifices, by pointing to the example
of one, who exalted amidst the mighty of the land, lately fighting among
them, did not hesitate to devote himself to death for the cause of his
sovereign.  At the moment therefore when the armies were ready to engage,
the royalists raised the cry of “Cavendish! on for Cavendish!” which was
as loudly answered by the enthusiastic shout of “Religion!” the zeal
which animated those who proclaimed it, by inspiring them with hopes of
immortality, rendered death less to be dreaded than the misfortunes of a
defeat. {20a}

Scarce had the words of onset been given, when the divisions of cavalry,
under the command of Cromwell and Fairfax, were led to the charge by
Vermeydun, a soldier of valour, who headed the first detachment as a
forlorn hope, aspiring to the honour of directing his comrades on to
victory.  Already the horsemen of the royalists, with a well directed
precision, had vigorously poured into their ranks the second discharge of
their fire arms.  These did some execution among them; and Cromwell thus
early had his horse shot under him.  A minute had elapsed before the
parties fiercely met in the close encounter, arm to arm.  Cromwell for a
time was compelled to grapple on foot with his enemies, entangled amid
the trappings of his dying charger.  Though felled to the ground as he
attempted to extricate himself from this perilous situation, he rose
uninjured.  This singular man, bold and intrepid, animated by zeal,
foremost in the fight, struggling with disasters, seemed peculiarly
preserved in all his dangers, to fill that situation in the page of
history, where, though elevated by violence, he powerfully commands our
admiration by his success, his prudence, and the daring of his genius.
Sir Ingram Hopton, who at this moment had attempted to seize him, was
killed. {20b}  Cromwell, now recovering a horse from a soldier near him,
bravely led on his companions to the combat, strengthening their stern
courage by the most signal proofs of his personal bravery.

Not with less valor was the conflict sustained on the part of the
royalists.  Sir John Henderson, the hardy veteran of former battles, firm
as a rock amid the rushing of the waves, resisted every impetuous
assault.  His adversaries were driven back in disorder; but these men,
not readily to be repulsed, returned, with a cool bravery and redoubled
vigor to the attack.  For half an hour, firm and undecided, continued the
contest, sword against sword, and fortitude repelling courage.  The
resolute warriors, who sustained the furious charges of Fairfax and
Cromwell, (for the whole were not engaged,) relinquished not a portion of
their ground.  At last, a division commanded by Sir William Saville
wavering, though reluctant to give way, became routed and completely
disordered.  Yielding they struck confusion into the other bodies of
their own horse; and these again were hurled with precipitance upon the
mass of their infantry.  All being alike borne down in this part of the
field, none were left to second the broken and disordered in again
advancing to the combat.  The division of Sir John Henderson and Lord
Ething alone maintained itself unyielding and unsubdued.  The exulting
army of the parliament, now taking advantage of the discomfiture of the
other troops, and the tumult of the infantry, assailed with a desperate
charge the yet unrepulsed.  In vain did the royalist commander exhort his
men to be resolute and undismayed; but no prudence could uphold the
advantages which valor must lose.  Their fortitude was giving way to
despair; and the successful, elated with the promises of victory, found
no equal disputants in men dismayed by the certainty of a defeat.
Perplexed amid the various and ineffectual efforts of the other bodies of
the royal troops, the disheartened defenders of the field yielded beneath
the shock of the adverse weapons.  The victorious soldiers now fiercely
plunging in amidst the routed dragoons, many of whom at this time were on
foot and in the most appalling confusion, saw them quickly disappearing
beneath the havoc of their swords and the fury of their horses.  The
infantry were for the most part destroyed; for being intercepted by a
body of cavalry, scarce a man survived the carnage. {21a}  There was now
no safety but in a dishonorable flight.  The pursuit continued beyond
Horncastle with unremitting fury; and along the road were strewed the
horse and the rider, the dead and the dying. {21b}

The soldiers under the command of Manchester, who as yet had partaken in
no respect in the glory of the blood-shed, reserved their efforts for
securing the prisoners, and assisting the scarce breathing wounded of the
enemy, who were scattered about the field in groups.  Such partisans as
had recently been embodied by the commission of array were pitiably
supplicating the mercy of their conquerors.  Cursing with deep execration
that little regard which had hurried them to the fight, without a feeling
of interest in its issue, they cried out that the commission of array had
brought them thither against their wills, and blessing the cause of
liberty and religion, added “We die as true servants of the parliament as
any in England, and woe be to those who were the cause that Lincoln and
York became the prey of such a war.” {22a}

Though the battle was fought with determined obstinacy; yet, whilst the
parties maintained their ground, the loss was comparatively small: the
havoc that ensued was among the routed and the flying.  There were killed
but few on the side of the parliament.  Those of rank who were slain of
the royal forces were Sir George Bolles, and Sir Ingram Hopton.  The
prisoners, about one thousand in number, were the wounded on the field,
and those parties of the dispersed fugitives, who to avoid the
overwhelming carnage of their pursuers had secreted themselves amongst
the rugged and winding banks of a neighbouring river: many indeed were
taken whilst seeking refuge in the very waters, where some had already
perished, bleeding and wearied in their armour, overcome in their
inability to recover themselves from the deeper parts of the stream.  The
trophies which the conquerors obtained in the fight of Winceby field,
were arms for fifteen hundred men, and thirty-five standards. {22b}

Returning from the pursuit, the exhausted cavalry rested for the night in
the villages around Horncastle.  The infantry occupied quarters in the
town, where they found two hundred horses left by their fugitive enemy.
Of the wounded, the Earl of Manchester ordered especial care to be taken,
whilst the dead were hastily consigned to the nearest graves.  The body
of Sir Ingram Hopton was brought to Horncastle and buried in the church:
for Cromwell who did not permit his political resentment to render him
callous or insensible to the generous feelings of a soldier, experienced
some sympathy for the individual whose ardor in attempting his
destruction, for what was deemed the welfare of his country, had cost the
sacrifice of his own life; he therefore, upon his arrival in the town,
commanded the inhabitants to fetch the body of Sir Ingram Hopton, and
inter it with the honors due to his rank; observing that though an enemy,
he was a gentleman and a soldier. {23a}

Of those royalists who escaped the slaughter, there were scarce a
thousand efficient for the field; and these were destined to sustain
another overthrow at the battle of Lincoln close, which completed the
warfare in this county.  Bolingbroke castle had already yielded; and this
with Tattershall, the principal places of defence in this neighbourhood,
were soon after devoted to the dismantling policy of the parliament,
which doomed them with the noble edifices of the country, to that
destruction which left them but ruins in silent and lingering decay.

Although this victory afforded a cause for so much rejoicing to the
friends of the parliament; yet were its consequences mightier for the
interests which it strengthened, by the defeat, on the same day, {23b} of
the Marquis of Newcastle before the fortress of Hull.  The Lord Fairfax
and Sir John Meldrum, making a desperate sortie, had completely
overthrown the royalists with much slaughter; forcing them, though
protected behind strong entrenchments, to abandon the siege with the loss
of all their cannon.  The impolicy of the royalist commander was now
perceptible too late.  This ruin of the affairs of the king seemed at
once to have obliterated all the generous services which the faithful
Newcastle had made in the cause of his sovereign; and shortly after these
disasters he retired to the continent, {23c} where he spent a life of
indigence, until the restoration gave again the royal authority to
Britain.  These actions, though inconsiderable in themselves, were yet
great in their effects.  The expectations of the royalists in Yorkshire
were now nearly blasted: Lincolnshire, after the occupation of its city,
escaped the further deluge of blood; and the defeats served to assist in
hastening the fight of Marston Moor, where the hopes of Charles were
reduced to that one gleam of hope, which was finally extinguished at the
battle of Naseby.



ANTIQUITIES.


                [Picture: Roman Urns found at Horncastle]

AMONGST the remains of antiquity at this place, the vestiges of the Roman
fortress are the most worthy of attention; and although they are too
small to give an adequate idea of the original structure, are yet
sufficient to show the form and extent of the space enclosed, which
appears to have been nearly a parallelogram, of about six hundred feet in
length, and in breadth three hundred and fifty on the east, and three
hundred on the west. {25}  The wall by which this area was surrounded was
fifteen or sixteen feet in thickness, and composed of small blocks of a
loosely aggregated sand stone, dug from the neighbouring hills.  It was
formed with casing stones on the outside, the internal parts being filled
up with courses laid diagonally, which according to the customary and
substantial mode of building among the Romans, were run together by
mortar disseminated through the interstices in a fluid state, forming a
cement which has acquired by time an imperishable induration.  Of the
casing stones none are now to be seen, except in cellars which have been
formed by the side of the wall.  Where the fragments are sufficiently
high, those portions of the Roman masonry, which remained after the
destruction of the fortress, may be perceived rising to about six or
seven feet above the ground, the diagonal courses of stone then ceasing.
Above this the construction is marked by masses of larger dimensions than
the lower parts; a circumstance evincing that another structure of a
different period has been erected on the original foundation: this was
probably a reparation which was made in the time of the Anglo-Saxons.  At
the north-east corner of the enclosure the remains of a circular turret
are still visible; but of towers or gateways no traces are left.

Near the junction of the two rivers, on the south-west of the town, was
formerly one of those mazes common to Roman stations, called the Julian
Bower.  In these the youth were exercised in a martial game, called Troy
Town, which in after years, though divested of its martial character,
continued to be amongst the healthy pastimes of the young, in their
evening assemblies of pleasure and sport. {26}  Cultivation has long
since effaced every vestige of the maze; but the piece of land on which
it stood still retains the name of the _Julian Bower Close_.

A peculiar rustic ceremony, which used annually to be observed at this
place, doubtless derived its origin from the Floral games of antiquity.
On the morning of May-day, when the young of the neighbourhood assembled
to partake in the amusements which ushered in the festivals of the month
of flowers, a train of youths collected themselves at a place to this day
called the _May Bank_.  From thence, with wands enwreathed with cowslips,
they walked in procession to the may-pole, situated at the west end of
the town, and adorned on that morning with every variety in the gifts of
Flora.  Here, uniting in the wild joy of young enthusiasm, they struck
together their wands, and scattering around the cowslips, testified their
thankfulness for that bounty, which widely diffusing its riches, enabled
them to return home rejoicing at the promises of the opening year.  That
innovation in the manners and customs of the country, which has swept
away the ancient pastimes of rustic simplicity, obliterated about forty
years ago this peculiar vestige of the Roman Floralia.

In the fields on the south side of the town, the ground abounds with
fragments of cinerary urns, and several perfect ones have also there been
discovered.  From these circumstances, together with the appearance of
the soil, it seems certain that in this part the Romans used to burn
their dead on the funeral pile.  Of the urns found, only two are known to
exist in the neighbourhood; one being in the collection of Sir Joseph
Banks, at Revesby Abbey, the other in the possession of Mr. Crowder, an
inhabitant of the town.

It is much to be regretted for the advancement of researches into local
antiquities that the chief part of the urns, coins, fibulæ, and other
Roman vestiges discovered at Horncastle, have been sold to strangers who
have visited the town, or to dealers elsewhere.  The coins which have
been found here are numerous, and though chiefly of small brass and
denarii ærei of the lower empire, yet they include many extremely fine
and varied specimens of the earlier imperial coins, both of a larger size
and of other metals, several of which are in the possession of different
individuals in the town.  Amongst these may be particularized the silver
coins of Vespasian, L. Septimius Severus, Alexander Severus, and
Volusianus; the large brass of Trajan; and the middle brass of Caligula,
Claudius, Nero, Trajan, Hadrian, Domitian, Antoninus Pius, Faustina the
elder, Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, and Faustina the younger.  The small
brass and denarii ærei form nearly a complete series of the emperors from
Gallienus to Valentinanus the second, and include also within that
period, coins of some of the tyrants of Britain and Gaul.  Beside these
are some others in the collection of the late Reverend Charles L’Oste,
now possessed by his son, but unfortunately no memoranda exist by which
they are to be distinguished from those obtained at other places.  This
gentleman also had in his collection several fibulæ and stiles which had
been discovered here.

A British coin found at this place has on its concave side the horse and
symbolic circles; on the convex is the representation of an animal
apparently intended for a stag, with similar ornaments around it, as the
other side possesses.  Many of the early English silver currency have
been found here, and also a specimen of the Scottish coinage of David the
second.

In deepening the bed of the river Bane, to complete the navigation, in
1802, an ornamental brass spur, part of a brass crucifix, and a dagger,
were found together at a short distance from the north bason of the
navigation.  The spur is now lost; the part of the crucifix and the
dagger are in the possession of the author.

                     [Picture: Ancient British Coin]



THE CHURCH.


FROM the silence of the Domesday Book respecting a church at this place,
it may be concluded that there was not one erected when that survey was
made; there however appears to have been one in the reign of Richard the
first. {29a}

             [Picture: North-East View of Horncastle Church]

The present structure, which is dedicated to Saint Mary, stands in the
centre of the town, and possesses but few attractions for the antiquary
or the architect.  It consists of a square tower, a nave and chancel,
with north and south aisles.  Being for the most part built with the soft
and imperfectly aggregated sand-stone of the neighbourhood, which yields
easily to the moisture of the atmosphere, it has suffered much from the
effects of time; and the decayed parts being repaired with brick gives to
the building a motley and unprepossessing appearance.

The few portions of the original architecture which have escaped the
silent ravages of years, and the hands of the innovator, bespeak the
building of no higher antiquity than the period of Henry the seventh.
The aisle on the north side of the chancel is ornamented with
embattlements, on which quatrefoils and blank shields are sculptured.  It
was probably used as a chantry, one of the windows of the aisle having
formerly contained an inscription justifying such a supposition. {29b}
This aisle does not extend the whole length of the chancel, and in the
space so left, the remains of an oratory and confessional are still
visible: this space formerly appropriated as a depository for coals to
distribute among the poor, is now occupied by a building to contain the
fire engines; a corresponding part of the south aisle being used as a
vestry.

The interior of the church is remarkably neat and well pewed.  A gallery
at the west end of the nave contains an organ which was purchased by
subscription in 1810.  Galleries are also erected in each aisle of the
nave.

In the wall of the north aisle is a stone, containing the figure in brass
of Sir Lionel Dymoke, in armour, kneeling on a cushion, and holding in
his hand a label on which is written,

    “Sc’ta trinitas unus deus miserere nob.”

On each side of him are two shields containing arms, at one of the lower
corners are the figures of his two sons, and at the other those of his
three daughters, and under him this inscription:

    “In honore sc’te et individue trinitatis Orate p’ a’ia Leonis Dymoke
    milit’ q’ obijt xvij die me’se augusti aº D’ni mº cccc xix cuj’ a’ie
    p’piciet’ de’ Amen.”

The shields contain these arms:—1. Sable, two lions passant in pale,
ducally crowned or, DYMOKE, empaling Barry of six ermine and gules, three
crescents sable, WATERTON; a crescent for difference.  2. DYMOKE,
empaling Vairè, on a fess gules frettè or, MARMYON, in chief, Ermine,
five fusils in fess, HEBDEN; a crescent for difference.  3. Argent, a
sword erect azure, hilt and pomel gules. {30a}  4. DYMOKE, empaling
Quarterly gules and argent, a cross engrailed counterchanged, HAYDON; a
crescent for difference.

On the floor beneath this monument is a brass, on which is the following
inscription nearly obliterated:

    “Leonis fossa nunc haec Dymoke capit ossa
    Miles erat Regis cui parce Deus prece matris
    Es testis Christe quod non jacet hic lapis iste
    Corpus ut ornetur sed spiritus ut memoretur
    Hinc tu qui transis senex medius puer an sis
    Pro me funde preces quia sic mihi fit venie spes.” {30b}

                 [Picture: Monument of Sir Lionel Dymoke]

On the floor of the vestry is a stone with this inscription around the
verge:

    “Here lyethe the Boyddes of Thomas Raithbeck & ame his wyf ye
    founders of the Beidhous Departed thys world in ye fayth of Christ ye
    last day of October in ye yere of or lord mdlxxv.”

On the wall over the door of the vestry is a shield containing three
storks proper, on an argent field; the crest a stork; and under the arms
this inscription:

    “Sacred to the Memory of the Rev. Mr. THO: GIBSON, A.M. Forty four
    years Vicar of this Parish.  He liv’d in such times when Truth to the
    Church, and Loyalty to the King, met with Punishment due only to the
    Worst of Crimes.  He was by the Rebellious Powers carried away
    Prisoner, four times, from his congregation, once exchanged into the
    Garrison of Newark, for a Dissenting Teacher: afterwards Sequester’d,
    and his family driven out by the then Earl of Manchester.  He
    survived the Restoration, and was brought back at the head of several
    hundreds of his Friends, and made a Prebendary, in the Cathedral
    Church of Lincoln.  As his Enemies never forgave his Zeal to the
    Church and Crown: so nothing but the height of Christian Charity
    could forgive the Insults he met with from them.  He Died April the
    22d, 1678.”

Against the wall on the south side of the chancel is a lozenge shaped
piece of canvas, on which are painted these arms, Argent, two bars sable,
each charged with three mullets of six points or, pierced gules; and
under them the following inscription:

    “Here lieth the worthy and memorable Kt. Sir INGRAM HOPTON, who paid
    his debt to nature and duty to his King and Country in the attempt of
    seizing the Arch-rebel in the bloody skirmish near Winceby, October
    the 6th, A.D. 1643. {32}

    “—nec tumultum
    Nec mori per vim metuit, tenente
    Cæsare terras.
    Paulum sepultæ distat inertiæ
    Celata virtus.”

Beside the sepulchral memorials already detailed, are a number of others
on the floor, and a few of recent date, on marble tablets, against the
walls.

At the end of the north aisle of the chancel, is the following table:

     The BENEFACTORS to the CHURCH and POOR of this Town, the Clauses of
     whose Wills may be seen at large in a Book in the Town Chest.  Note
                       these Tables were erected 1724.

    WILLIAM EVERITT and JOSEPH BROWN Churchwardens.

                             Anno 1611, October.

    Mr. Robert Clark of Woodhall gave to the Poor of this town . . .
    Shillings a year, to be paid the vicar on St. Thomas’s, and by him to
    be distributed every Christmas-day for ever, out of his lands in
    Thimbleby, now belonging to John Hutchinson, Gent.

    Mrs. Ann Smith gave the poor of Horncastle twenty shillings a year
    out of her lands there, now in the possession of Mr. Thomas Coats: it
    is given in brown bread every Good Friday.

    George Acham of Asterby, Gent. gave also one hundred and forty
    pounds, to purchase lands, the rents thereof to be disposed off
    yearly to the poor of Horncastle, at the discretion of the governors
    of the free-school (for the time being,) which lands are in the
    parish of Burgh in the Marsh.

                           Anno 1639, May the 2nd.

    Mr. William Hurtscroft gave one house the yearly rent of fifty-two
    shillings; to be given weekly (viz.) twelve pence in bread every
    Lord’s day to poor fatherless and motherless children in Horncastle,
    by the overseers for the poor; the said house now in possession of
    widow Scamon.

                                The same year.

    Andrew Kent, gent. gave six pounds thirteen shillings and four pence,
    to be a stock for the poor of Horncastle, which is applied
    accordingly in coals for their use.

                           Anno 1661, June the 6th.

    Thomas Bromley of Conesby gent. left to the poor of this town forty
    shillings per annum (viz.) twenty shillings every good Friday, and
    twenty every St. Thomas’s day, to be paid out of his lands in Haltham
    super Bane; now the said lands belong to Thomas Hamerton, gent.

    Rutland Snowden, gent. gave to the poor of Horncastle one house of
    the yearly rent of twenty-six shillings; but being decayed, is now
    reduced to thirteen, paid in bread six-pence every other Sunday: the
    said house belongs now to Mr. William Dawson.

                         Anno 1673, December the 5th.

    Thomas James, gent. gave to the poor of Horncastle twenty shillings
    yearly in white bread on every Christmas day for ever; payable out of
    his lands there, which lands are now the estate of Thomas Howgrave,
    Esquire.

                        Anno 1702, December the 20th.

    Captain John Francis, gave two chaldern of coals yearly to be given
    to the poor, appointed by the governors of the school, out of lands
    in this town now the Rev. Mr. John Francis’s of Sibsey.

                        Anno 1703, December the 14th.

    Mrs. Douglass Tyrwhitt of Gaiton on the would gave ten shillings
    yearly to the poor of Horncastle on St. Thomas’s day, out of her
    lands in Belshford, now the lands of Joseph Sutton of the same.

                           Anno 1696, May the 26th.

    Nicolas Shipley, gent. gave to this church one brass candlestick of
    twenty-four sockets, and Fox’s three books of martyrs.  He gave also
    to the poor five pounds, which was immediately given amongst them,
    and thirty shillings yearly for ever, (viz.) twenty on St. Thomas’s
    day, and ten every good Friday, in brown bread, to be paid out of his
    lands adjoining to this church-yard, now purchased by Mr. Thomas
    Hamerton.  He gave also to the governors of the school one hundred
    pounds, the interest thereof to put out poor boys apprentices to
    trades; but their then treasurer dying insolvent, that money was
    lost.  We mention this here, because this misfortune doth not lessen
    the charity of that well-disposed gentleman.

                                  Anno 1719.

    Mrs. Mary Hussey, widdow, gave one silver plate to the communion
    table for ever.

                                  Anno 1721.

    Mrs. Dorothy Parker of Boston, gave to this church one brass
    candlestick of sixteen sockits, and to the poor widdows and widdowers
    of this town she gave sixty pounds, the interest or rents thereof to
    be given amongst them on St. John’s day, in Christmas, and St.
    James’s in July, yearly, for ever.

                                  Anno 1724.

    Mrs. Mary Waters, widdow, gave to the overseers of the poor, five
    pounds: to be by them put out at interest, and the said interest to
    be given to the poor on Christmas day, yearly, for ever.

Against the wall over the north entrance are several scythes and hay
knives, some of which are yet remaining in the shafts to which they have
been affixed, in order to render them instruments of warfare.  The
occasion for which they were so prepared is unknown, the traditionary
accounts of them being both vague and contradictory.

In the steeple are six bells, bearing the following inscriptions:

    1  LECTVM : FVGE : DISCVTE : SOMNVM. G: S: I. W : H: PENN : FVSOR:
    17l7.

    2  IN: TEMPLO : VENERARE : DEVM. HEN : PENN : NOS : FVDIT :
    CORNVCASTRI.

    3  SVPPLICEM : DEVSI : AVDIT. DANIEL HEDDERLY CAST ME 1727.

    4  THO. OSBORN FECIT DOWNHAM NORFOLK 1801.  THO. BRYAN AND D. BROWN
    CHURCHWARDENS.

    5  DVM : SPIRAS : SPERA. H : PENN : FVSOR : 1717.  THO : ET : SAM :
    HAMERTON-ÆDITIVI.

    6  EXEAT : E : BVSTO : AVSPICE : CHRISTO. THO : LODINGTON : L.L.D :
    VIC. H : P : 1717.

The benefice is a vicarage, in the presentation of the Bishop of
Carlisle, valued in the King’s books at £14. 4s. 2d.

           [Picture: Seal of the Grammar School at Horncastle]



THE GRAMMAR SCHOOL.


AT the south-east corner of the church yard is the Grammar School, a
spacious and well constructed edifice of brick.  It was founded and
endowed by Edward Lord Clinton and Saye, the Lord High Admiral of
England, under the authority of letters patent, dated the 25th of June,
1652. {35}  By these letters it was ordained, that this institution
should be denominated “The Free Grammar School of Queen Elizabeth, in the
Town or Soke of Horncastle, of the foundation of Edward Lord Clinton and
Saye,” for the education, training, and instruction of boys and youths in
grammar, and to be appropriated to this object for ever.

The school was to be conducted by a master, and a sub-master, or usher:
ten governors were also appointed and incorporated, with perpetual
succession, and a common seal.  These governors were empowered on the
death of any of their body, to elect others in their places; also to
nominate the master and usher on any vacancy; and to make such statutes
concerning the preservation and disposal of the revenues, as
circumstances at any time might dictate.  Besides holding the endowments,
they were authorized to purchase and receive lands and other possessions,
not exceeding £40. per annum.

The estates by which the establishment is maintained, consist of houses
and land situated at Horncastle, Hemingby, Sutton, Huttoft and Winthorpe.
The lands in the last three named parishes being subject to inundations
from the sea, the annual revenue is rendered precarious; but in the more
favorable years it amounts to about £200.

The salaries for a long time were £40. per annum to the master, and £30.
to the sub-master or usher: but on the appointment of the present master,
in 1818, the salary was advanced to £80. per annum, to which was also
added a house for his residence; the salary of the sub-master remaining
as heretofore, at £30.  The sum of £2. 2s. per annum is charged for those
scholars who are instructed in writing and arithmetic.  There are at this
period about twenty boys on the foundation.

The governors of this institution have also the management of another
school in the town, for the instruction of poor children in reading,
sewing, and knitting.  A house, with a salary to the teacher of £30. per
annum, charged upon certain estates in Horncastle, having been bequeathed
to them in trust, for that purpose, by Mr. Richard Watson, a native of
this place, who died in 1784.



THE RIVER BANE AND NAVIGABLE CANAL.


THE river Bane, rising at the village of Ludford, takes its course in a
direction nearly south to join its waters with those of the Witham.
After meandering through an extent of country about fourteen miles, it
receives at Horncastle, the tributary stream of the Waring, and
abundantly supplies the town, conveniently situated at the confluence of
the two rivers.  From hence continuing a gently winding course, it washes
Tattershall and its moorlands, before it falls into the larger river, to
increase its waters to the sea.

In the year 1792, an act of parliament was obtained for making the Bane
navigable from the river Witham, through Tattershall to Horncastle. {37}
The act, after reciting the names of the original subscribers,
incorporates them by the name of “The Company of Proprietors of the
Horncastle Navigation in the County of Lincoln,” giving them perpetual
succession and a common seal, and empowering them to raise £1500. in
three hundred shares of £50. each.  The interest of these was not to
exceed £8. per cent.  No person was to be the possessor of less than one
share, nor to hold more than twenty.  As circumstances might require,
they were authorized to raise £1,000. more, by shares or mortgages of the
tolls.

The tollage allowed by this act was, for goods passing the whole length
of the navigation, 2_s._ per ton; from the Witham to the seventh lock,
1_s._ 9_d._ per ton; and from the Witham to the fourth lock, 1_s._ 3_d._
per ton; excepting lime, lime-stone, manure, or materials for roads, for
which, only half the already mentioned tolls were to be taken.

The works were commenced in the year 1793: but, when about two thirds
were completed, the whole of the funds to be appropriated to their
execution were already expended.  After suffering the canal to remain
several years in this unfinished state, the company applied again to
Parliament, and in the year 1800 another act was obtained, enabling them
to raise £20,000. more by subscription amongst themselves, by admission
of new subscribers in shares of £50. each, by mortgage, or by granting
annuities.  The limitation of shares and interest were repealed by this
act; and the tonnage rates advanced to 3_s._ 3_d._ per ton for the whole
length of the navigation, 2_s._ 7_d._ to the seventh lock, and 1_s._
8_d._ to the fourth; lime, lime-stone, manure, and materials for roads
excepted as before from the payment of full rates.

Shortly after the works were recommenced, the plan of completing them by
an entirely new canal was adopted in preference to that which they had
before pursued of rendering the Bane navigable.  It was therefore at the
village of Dalderby diverted from the course of the natural stream, and
carried on in a less varied track to the point of junction between the
waters of the Bane and Waring: from hence it was continued in the
divergent courses of these two rivers, to the more extreme parts of the
town of Horncastle.  It was completed in September, 1802, and on Friday
the seventeenth of that month the vessels entered the town.  The canal is
sufficiently deep to navigate vessels of fifty tons burthen.

From this town to the river Witham the distance is about eleven miles, in
which the stream has a fall of eighty-four feet.



THE PRESENT STATE OF THE TOWN.


ALTHOUGH this place was favored at an early period with a charter for a
market, which in the time of Henry the eighth appears to have been well
frequented, yet it remained for many years little more than a
considerable village. {39}  From the earliest accounts it seems to have
been gradually encreasing; but it was not until later years, when a new
impulse was given to the agricultural interests of the country, that it
began to exhibit material evidences of extension and improvement.

   [Picture: Plan of Horncastle in 1722, from “Stukeley’s Itinerarium”]

From a plan of the town drawn by Dr. Stukeley, in the year 1722, it
appears at that period of time, now nearly the lapse of a century, to
have been little more than half its present extent.  This plan, not
having been made from actual survey, cannot be considered as an accurate
representation: nevertheless it is calculated to give a tolerable idea of
the state of the town at the time it was executed.  It is traditionally
asserted that at that period scarcely a brick house was to be found in
the parish; the early erected dwellings being all constructed with clay
walls, and covered with thatch; thus evidencing that common character
which Leland the antiquary assigns to the towns of this part.  The clay
buildings have for the most part disappeared, and brick structures are
now erected in their stead; and from the spirit of improvement which has
lately been evinced, they will doubtless in a few years be entirely
removed.  The rebuilding of many houses in the principal streets in a
handsome manner, within the last twenty years, has given to the town an
air of respectability; but the effect which would be produced by these
buildings in its general appearance, is materially diminished, by the
narrowness and irregularity of the streets.  At this time the number of
houses may be computed at about seven hundred, and of inhabitants, about
three thousand five hundred.

The entrances to the town, as well as its general aspect, have also been
improved by the inclosure of the fields by which it is surrounded.  To
accomplish this an act of parliament was obtained in 1803, and carried
into effect the following year.

                  [Picture: Plan of Horncastle in 1819]

In no respect has the town changed more than in its trade; a large
proportion of its inhabitants having formerly been employed in the
tanning of leather, in which manufacture the yards on the south side of
the Far-street were almost exclusively occupied.  About fifty years ago
the number of these establishments began rapidly to decline, and are at
this time reduced to two.  Since the completion of the canal in 1801, a
considerable trade in corn and wool has been carried on here; about
thirty thousand quarters of the former, and three thousand sheets of the
latter being annually sent from this place.  The town also from its
situation in a well inhabited district enjoys a large retail trade.

There are now three fairs for horses, cattle and sheep, held here
annually.  The first, which concludes on the twenty-second of June, has
of late years declined very much, and though chartered for eight days
seldom continues more than three.  The second, which terminates on the
twenty-first of August, has long been celebrated as the largest fair for
horses in the kingdom, perhaps it may be said in the world; it continues
about ten days, being three days more than the time expressed in the
charter.  To this fair are brought for sale horses of all descriptions
from every part of the kingdom, to the number of many thousands; and
beside the most extensive dealers of this country, there are to be found
in the fair purchasers and dealers from different parts of the continent
of Europe, and even from America.  The third fair, which is held on the
twenty-eighth and twenty-ninth days of October, was removed to this place
in 1768, from Market-Stainton, a decayed market town, about eight miles
distant, two hundred pounds being given to the lord of the manor of that
place, to permit the removal, one half of this sum was raised by
subscription amongst the inhabitants of this town, the other by the
lessee of the manor. {41}  The market is now held every Saturday, to
which it was changed from Wednesday, the day mentioned in the charter,
probably in consequence of the markets at Boston and Louth being also on
that day; but the time at which the alteration took place cannot now be
ascertained.

A building, situated on the south side of the church yard, is
appropriated for the purposes of a Dispensary, which is supported by
public subscription.  Those to whom medical aid is administered, are such
of the sick poor as are recommended by subscribers; and the many to whom
assistance has been afforded, evince its utility in a striking degree.
The number of patients admitted from the commencement of the institution
in September 1789, to September 1818, was 9253.  It is attended two days
in the week by two physicians, whose services are gratuitous, and by an
apothecary, who receives a salary.  A female accoucheur has also been
lately added to the establishment.

A Literary Society, which was established here in the year 1790, has
formed a permanent library, which is kept at the Dispensary.  It contains
about one thousand volumes, and is open to the members two days in the
week.  For several years the subscription was only ten shillings and
sixpence per annum; it was afterwards advanced to fourteen shillings, and
subsequently to one pound.  Subscribers are now also required to pay ten
shillings and sixpence on their admission.  The society at present
consists of about forty members.

In the year 1807 the inhabitants of this town in conjunction with several
other towns and villages, in the county of Lincoln, made application to
parliament, and obtained an act for the recovery of debts not exceeding
the sum of five pounds.  The commissioners hold their courts at this
place, as well as at the other towns specified in the act, every fourth
Thursday.

The education of the poor which has lately excited so much attention in
various parts of the kingdom, has not been neglected here.  A school on
the Lancasterian or British system was established at a public meeting
held in October, 1813; and but a few days subsequently a meeting was held
at the church, when it was resolved to establish also a school on the
plan of Dr. Bell.  Early in the ensuing year buildings were erected, and
each system began to be acted upon.  Both schools are supported by
voluntary contributions, and each contains about two hundred children.

Beside the established church, there are in this town a society of
Wesleyan Methodists, a small congregation of Calvinistic Baptists, and a
newly formed society of primitive Methodists.




THE SOKE OF HORNCASTLE.


AT the time of compiling the Domesday record, there appears to have been
included other parishes, in addition to those now comprised in this soke;
but it cannot now be ascertained at what time the alteration took place.
Beside the parish of Horncastle it at present contains the following
townships:—Thimbleby, West Ashby, Low Tointon, High Tointon, Mareham on
the Hill, Roughton, Haltham, Wood Enderby, Moorby, Wilksby, Mareham le
Fen, and Coningsby.  To these have lately been added Langriville and
Thornton le Fen, portions of the fen district, which had been sold by the
commissioners appointed under an act of enclosure, and rendered parochial
by act of parliament in 1812.  On the enclosure of these fens, under the
act which was obtained in 1801, the whole of the parishes in this soke,
excepting the two newly formed ones, had portions of land allotted to
them, in lieu of their right of common.

West Ashby, High Tointon, Mareham on the Hill, and Wood Enderby, were
formerly hamlets of the parish of Horncastle; but have for several years
been considered as distinct parishes, and have appointed their own
churchwardens and overseers of the poor.



THIMBLEBY,


In Domesday Book Stimelbi, {43} and in old writings Thimelby, is about a
mile north-west from Horncastle, the parishes adjoining each other.  The
manor which in the reign of Charles the second was the property of Sir
Robert Bolles of Scampton, is now possessed by Thomas Hotchkin, Esquire,
of Tixover, in the county of Rutland, in the possession of whose
ancestors it has been for many years.  In this parish is also the manor
of Hallgarth, which formerly belonged to a family named Bolton; but is
now the property of Richard Elmhirst, Esquire, of Louth.  The church
rebuilt in the year 1744, is a small stone edifice, possessing a
considerable share of architectural merit: a stone over the door points
out the year in which it was rebuilt, but besides this it exhibits no
other inscription. {44a}  The advowson of the rectory belongs to the lord
of the manor.



WEST ASHBY,


In Domesday called Aschebi, and in old writings Askeby, is a parish
adjoining to the north boundaries of that of Horncastle, from which town
the village is about two miles distant.  In this parish is the manor of
Ashby Thorpe, now the property of Mr. Joseph Rinder; but the possessor of
that of Horncastle claims manorial rights over the other parts of the
parish.  The church consists of a tower, a nave with a north aisle, and a
chancel. {44b}  The benefice is a curacy in the presentation of the
Bishop of Carlisle.



LOW TOINTON,


In Domesday Todingtune, and in old writings Nether Tointon, is about a
mile eastward from the town of Horncastle, the parishes adjoining.  The
manorial estates, which comprise nearly the whole parish are the property
of Launcelot Rolleston, Esquire, of Watnall, in the county of Nottingham,
by whose ancestors it has been possessed for several generations.  The
church, which is a small modern erection, being rebuilt in 1811, contains
a very curiously sculptured font, and the following inscription on a
plate of copper in the north wall:

    “Heare lyeth the Body of EDWARD ROLLESTON Esquir who departed this
    Life the twenty-third of July in the thirtey-fourth year of his age
    interr’d underneath this place the fourth of August Anno Domini
    1687.”

The patrons of the rectory are Lord Gwydir, and the Baroness Willoughby
of Eresby, his lady.



HIGH TOINTON,


In old writings Over Tointon, is about a mile and a half eastward from
Horncastle, to which parish and also that of Low Tointon it adjoins.
From only one place of this name being mentioned in the Domesday record,
it is probable that at the time of making that survey both High and Low
Tointon were included in one parish.  The manorial estates, which have
descended with those of Horncastle, belong to the Bishop of Carlisle, and
are leased to different individuals.  The church is a small uninteresting
building.  The Bishop of Carlisle is patron of the curacy.



MAREHAM ON THE HILL,


Anciently written Maringe and Mayring, is about a mile and a half
south-east from Horncastle, the parishes adjoining each other.  The manor
once belonged to Edward Marsh, Esquire, of Hundle House, in the county of
Lincoln, by a descendant of whom it was sold to William Hudson, Esquire,
of Gray’s Inn.  In 1659 it was sold to a person named Duncome, of whom it
was purchased, in 1688, by Sir Edmund Turnor, of Stoke Rochford, Knight,
and is now possessed by his descendant of the same names.  The chapel is
completely destitute of interest.  On repairing it, about fifteen years
ago, two nobles of Edward the fourth, two angels of Henry the seventh,
and several silver coins of different reigns, contained in a leathern
purse, were discovered concealed in the wall.  The patron of the curacy
is the Bishop of Carlisle.



ROUGHTON,


In Domesday Rocstune, and in old writings Ructon, is about four miles
from Horncastle.  The manorial estates belong to Sir Joseph Banks.  The
church, which is a small building, consisting of a tower nave and
chancel, contains a marble tablet on which is the following inscription:

    “Here lies the Body of NORREYS FYNES, Esq. Grandson to Sir Henry
    Clinton, commonly called Fynes, eldest Son of Henry Earl of Lincoln,
    by his Second Wife, Daughter of Sir Richard Morrison, and Mother of
    Francis Lord Norreys, afterwards Earl of Berkshire.  He had by his
    much beloved and only Wife Elizabeth, who lies by him, Twelve
    Children, of which Four Sons and Two Daughters were living at his
    decease, which happened on the 10th of January 1735–6 in the 75th
    year of his age.  From the Revolution he always liv’d a Nonjuror,
    which rendered him incapable of any other Publick Employment (tho’ by
    his Great Abilitys and Known Courage equal to the most Difficult and
    Dangerous) than that of being Steward to two great Familys, wherein
    he distinguish’d himself during his Service of 40 years a most
    Faithful and Prudent Manager, of a most Virtuous and Religious Life.
    His paternal Estate he left without any addition to his Son KENDAL
    his next heir.  His eldest Son CHARLES was buried here the 26th of
    August 1722, aged 36 years, whose Pleasant Disposition adorn’d by
    many virtues which he acquir’d by his Studys in Oxford made his death
    much lamented by all his Acquaintance.”

There also occur two other tablets; one to the memory of the Rev. Arthur
Rockcliffe, who died in 1798, aged 71; the other to the memory of Charles
Pilkington, Esq. who died in 1798, aged 75, and of Abigail his wife, who
died in 1817, aged 80. {46}  The rectory, united to that of Haltham in
1741, is in the presentation of the Honorable Champion Dymoke.



HALTHAM,


Called in the Domesday survey Holtham, is about five miles distant from
Horncastle.  The manorial estates, which comprise almost the whole of the
parish, once belonged to the Marmyons of Scrivelsby, and are now
possessed by the Champion Dymoke, a descendant of the female branch of
that family.  The church, which appears to have suffered much from time,
has in its pristine state possessed a considerable share of architectural
merit.  A large window at the eastern end contains very fine tracery, and
at one time, together with some of the other windows, exhibited a large
portion of stained glass, of which only one piece, containing the arms of
La Warre, is now remaining. {47}  The rectory, united to that of Roughton
in 1741, is in the presentation of the lord of the manor.



WOOD ENDERBY,


In the Domesday record written Endrebi, is about five miles distant from
Horncastle.  The manor is the property of Sir Joseph Banks.  The church
is a small uninteresting building.  The Bishop of Carlisle is patron of
the curacy.



MOORBY,


In Domesday Morebi, is about five miles distant from Horncastle.  The
manorial estates, comprising the principal part of the parish, are the
property of Sir Joseph Banks.  The church is totally destitute of
interest.  The Bishop of Carlisle is the patron of the rectory.



WILKSBY,


In Domesday Wilchesbi, is about six miles distant from Horncastle.  The
manor is the property of Sir Joseph Banks.  The church is a small modern
erection.  The Champion Dymoke is patron of the rectory.



MAREHAM LE FEN,


In the Domesday book called Marun, and in old writings Marum, is about
seven miles distant from Horncastle, and situated on the verge of the
recently enclosed fenny district from whence it has received its
appellation.  The manor is the property of Sir Joseph Banks, by an
ancestor of whom it was purchased, together with the three before
mentioned manors, above a century ago.  The manor house, which has for
several years been occupied by Mr. James Roberts, possesses from its
adjoining gardens, a considerable share of interest.  Having accompanied
Sir Joseph Banks, in the first voyage of Captain Cook round the world,
Mr. Roberts has sought to associate with the rural simplicities of an
English garden, such objects of curiosity as a pleasurable recollection
of those scenes had furnished.  In addition to numerous rustic and
ornamental seats, the gardens are embellished with huts resembling those
of Terra del Fuego and New Holland; and also a small museum of
curiosities, principally from the South Sea islands.  A visit to this
spot is always an agreeable recreation.  The following sonnet was written
after a visit here, by a native of Jamaica.

    Dear is the rural scene that Fancy loves,
    Where tuneful Rapture chants th’ enliv’ning song,
    In wildest warblings to the darkling groves,
    Pouring in wildest mood the strains along;
    While Echo, from the leafy bowers among,
    Gives a soft cadence to the songster’s tale,
    A mingled sweetness to the warbling throng,
    That comes in whispers on the balmy gale.
    These, Mareham, with thy spreading greenwood shade,
    Thy silent waters, and thy mossy cell,
    Breathe such a charm, that oft Delight has strayed,
    With ling’ring steps, ’mid scenes she lov’d so well;
    And when fond Mem’ry shall thy joys renew,
    She’ll tell with musing voice her sweet, her last adieu.

The church consists of a tower, a nave with north and south aisles and a
chancel. {49}  In the chancel is a tablet to the memory of the Rev. Henry
Shepherd, who was rector of this parish thirty-four years, and died in
January 1764, aged 62.  The advowson of the rectory belongs to the Bishop
of Carlisle.



CONINGSBY,


In Domesday Cuningesbi, is a considerable village on the banks of the
river Bane, about eight miles from Horncastle.  The manor, which was once
possessed by the Marmions of Wintringham, has for many years belonged to
the Heathcote family, and is now the property of Sir Gilbert Heathcote,
Baronet, of Normanton in Rutlandshire.  The church consists of a tower of
excellent masonry, a nave, two aisles and a chancel. {50}  The rectory,
which is in the presentation of the lord of the manor, was for several
years held by the Reverend John Dyer, the poet.  It was here that he
finished his didactic poem of “The Fleece.”  He died at this place in
1782, and lies buried in the church; but there is no inscription to
perpetuate his memory.



LANGRIVILLE AND THORNTON LE FEN.


The lands composing these parishes were chiefly those sold by the
commissioners appointed under the act for draining and enclosing Wildmore
Fen; Langriville also contains the portion allotted to the Earl of
Stamford and Warrington, in lieu of his manorial rights over Armtree and
Wildmore.  In 1812, an act of parliament was passed rendering these
lands, with others, parochial, and approximating these two parishes to
the soke of Horncastle.



POPULATION. {54}

Parishes.    No. of               In 1801.                  In 1811.
             Families
             in 1588.
                          Houses.      Persons.     Houses.      Persons.
Horncastle           164          424         2015          553         2622
Thimbleby             40           50          224           65          316
West Ashby            44           67          297           76          370
Low                   12            9           49           16           98
Tointon
High                  18           14           93           24          121
Tointon
Mareham on            22           22          110           23          122
the Hill
Roughton              30           23          110           22          106
Haltham               25           29          115           29          143
Wood                  24           30          153           31          183
Enderby
Moorby                19           24           79           24          105
Wilksby                6            9           54            9           53
Mareham le            87           98          383          104          487
Fen
Coningsby            221          302         1301          326         1658

BAUMBER.


THE village of Baumber or Bamburgh is situated in the hundred of Gartree,
about four miles northward of Horncastle, on the turnpike road leading
from that place to Lincoln.  In the Domesday survey it is called
Badeburgh, which perhaps may signify Bane burgh, or a town on the Bane,
that river forming the eastern boundary of the parish.  At the period of
making that survey, Ulf and Gilbert de Gand are mentioned as proprietors.
{55}

    [Picture: Stourton Hall, Baumber, Seat of Joseph Livesey, Esquire]

The manor, together with the adjoining hamlet of Stourton parva, once
belonged to Thomas Dighton, Esquire, whose daughter and heiress was
married to Edward Clinton, second son of the first Earl of Lincoln.  On
failure of male issue in the elder branch the earldom devolved to the son
of this Edward, whose successors afterwards had the Dukedom of Newcastle
conferred on them.  These estates continued in the possession of this
family until the latter part of the last century, when they were sold to
Thomas Livesey, Esquire, of Blackbourn, in the county of Lancaster, whose
son, the present proprietor resides thereon, in an elegant mansion, which
was completed in 1810.  Part of the residence of the Earls of Lincoln is
still standing.

The church at Baumber with all its appurtenances, and eight oxgangs of
land, were given by Gilbert de Gaunt to the monks at Bridlington, which
grant Pope Innocent the fourth and the Bishop of Lincoln confirmed. {56a}
It is now a donative, extrajudicial.  It was rebuilt about sixty years
ago, and is a very neat brick structure, consisting of a tower, a nave
with side aisles, and a chancel. {56b}  Under the chancel is the vault of
the Newcastle family, which was their place of sepulture previous to
disposing of their estates in this parish; but although they still retain
the church, none of the family have been buried there since 1794.  Over
the vault are the following inscriptions:

    “Here lieth the Body of Francis Clinton al’s Fynes Esq. Grandson of
    Henry Lord Clinton Earl of Lincoln who departed this life Feb. 5 Anno
    Dom. 1681.”

    “Here lieth the Body of Priscilla the Wife of Francis Clinton al’s
    Fynes Esq. who departed this life Febr. 15 Anno Dom. 1679.”

In the north aisle is a stone with this inscription around the verge;

    “Orate p’ a’iabs Joh’es Eland armig’i Alicie et Elisabeth uxor
    ejusde’ qui Joh’es obijt xix die marcii aº d’ni millo cccclxxiii cuj’
    q’rs a’iabs p’pciet’ de.”

In 1811, the population of this parish amounted to 290, and the number of
houses to 51.




EDLINGTON.


AT the time of forming the Domesday survey, this place, then called
Tedlintune formed part of the Soke of Horncastle; {57} but is now
comprised in the hundred of Gartree.  It is very pleasantly situated
about two miles northward of Horncastle, near to the road leading from
that place to Lincoln.

The manorial estates comprising the chief part of the parish, are the
property of Richard Samuel Short, Esquire, a descendant of a female
branch of the family of that name, which he adopted on coming into
possession of the estates.  The manor house, the seat of the proprietor,
though not of regular architecture, acquires an agreeable effect from the
grove in which it is situated.  From the house the prospect to the
south-west, over the adjacent level country, is both extensive and
pleasing.

    [Picture: Edlington Grove, Seat of Richard Samuel Short, Esquire]

The church is a small building possessing no claim to attention.  The
vicarage is in the gift of the Duchy of Lancaster.  The rectorial tythes
belong to the grammar school at Oakham, in the county of Rutland.

On under-draining a field in this parish, in the latter part of the year
1819, several heaps of ox bones were dug up, and with each heap an urn of
baked clay, apparently of Roman manufacture; but unfortunately none of
the urns were taken up whole.  To account for these relics being found
here, it is probable that on this spot a Roman sacrifice had been
celebrated, in honor of some deity, on the occasion of a victory, or in
the exercise of other pagan rites.

Annexed to this parish is the hamlet or manor of Poolham, anciently
called Polum.  It formed part of the barony of Gilbert de Gaunt until
about the thirty-fifth year of Edward the first, when Robert de
Barkeworthe died seized of it; {58a} and it appears to have been the
residence of Walterus de Barkeworthe, who died in 1374, and was buried in
the cloister of Lincoln cathedral.  Afterwards it was the residence of
the family of Thimbleby, a branch of the Thimblebys of Irnham, {58b} who
probably built the mansion house within the ancient moat, about the time
of Henry the eighth.  The Savilles of Howley in the County of York,
enjoyed the estate in the reign of Elizabeth, and in 1600, Sir John
Saville, Knight, sold it to George Bolles, Esquire, citizen of London,
whose descendant Sir John Bolles, Baronet, conveyed the same to Sir
Edmund Turnor, of Stoke Rochford, Knight, and it is now the inheritance
of Edmund Turnor, Esquire. {58c}

Within the moat, beside the mansion house, are the remains of a chapel,
built of stone, a font, and a grave-stone with the date 1527.

In 1811, the parish of Edlington contained 27 houses, and 189
inhabitants.

                   [Picture: Ancient Cross at Somersby]




SOMERSBY.


The village of Somersby is pleasantly situated on the wolds, in the
hundred of Hill, at about the distance of six miles east from Horncastle.

“The Topcliffes were an ancient family at Somersby, of which family
Richard Topcliffe was the representative in 1592.  He was the eldest son
of Robert Topcliffe, by Margaret one of the daughters of Thomas Lord
Borough, and married Jane, daughter of Sir Edward Willoughby of Wollaton
Nottinghamshire, and had issue Charles his heir, and three other sons who
died infants, and a daughter Susannah.  He was a most implacable
persecutor of the Roman Catholics, so much so, that the use of the rack
and other tortures were called Topcliffian customs.” {60a}

The manorial estates, which comprise the whole parish, have for many
years been the property of a family named Burton.  The present proprietor
is William Raynor Burton, Esquire, which latter name he assumed on coming
into possession of the estates on the death of his uncle, Robert Burton,
Esquire, of Lincoln.

On the south side of the church, near to the porch, is an elegant stone
cross, which having escaped both the ravages of time, and the destruction
of the Puritans, remains in so perfect a state as to be justly esteemed
of unrivalled excellence and beauty.  The extreme height of it, including
the subcourse, is fifteen feet.  The shaft is octagonal, and decorated
with a capital, surmounted by a coronal of small embattlements.  The
cross, with its pediment, which rises from this, is ornamented on the
south face with the representation of the crucified founder of the
christian faith, and on the opposite side with that of the virgin and
child.

The church is a small building consisting of a tower, nave, and chancel,
and is void of architectural interest. {60b}  In the wall at the end of
the chancel is a plate of brass, on which is sculptured the
representation of a person full robed, kneeling on a cushion before a
reading desk, in the sinister upper corner is a shield containing arms,
and under the figure this inscription:

    “Here lyeth GEORGE LITTLEBVRY of Somersby seventh Sonne of Thomas
    Littlebvry of Stainsbie Esq. who died the 13 daye of Octob. in ye
    yeare of our Lord 1612 being abovt the age of 73 yeares.”

The shield contains these arms:—1. Two lioncels statant guardant in pale
Quarterly, 1 and 4, Barry of six; 2 and 3 A bend.  3. Three shark bolts.
4. A mullet between three crescents, a dexter canton.  On the fesse point
a rose for difference.

Against the skreen between the nave and chancel is a marble tablet
surmounted by a shield containing the arms of BURTON, Sable, a chevron
argent, between three owls argent, ducally crowned or; the crest, an owl
argent, crowned as before.  Under the arms is this inscription:

    “Here lieth Mrs. KATH. BURTON Daughter of Richard Langhorne Esq.  She
    died Aug. 25 A.D. 1742.  Also ROBERT BURTON Esq. Citizen of London,
    Husband of the said Mrs. Katherine Burton.  He died Nov. 30 1753.”

The advowson of the rectory belongs to the lord of the manor.

In a woody dell in this parish is a spring, gently bursting from the
rock, called Holy-well, but the name of the saint to whom it was
dedicated is not preserved.

According to the returns of 1811, this village at that time contained 14
houses and 73 inhabitants.




SCRIVELSBY.


ABOUT two miles south of Horncastle, on the road leading from that place
to Boston, stands the village of Scrivelsby, which is included in the
Hundred of Gartree.

            [Picture: Ancient Monuments in Scrivelsby Church]

At the time of compiling the Domesday survey, it appears that part of
this parish, then called Scrivelesbi, was annexed to the Soke of
Horncastle, which was then retained by the conqueror. {62}  By the same
record, the manor appears to have been then holden by Robert de Spenser,
but by what service is not said.  How it passed from De Spenser to the
family of Marmyon; whether by inheritance, or escheat of the crown, and
subsequent grant, cannot now be ascertained.  It was however shortly
after in the tenure of Robert Marmyon, whose male descendants enjoyed the
same until the twentieth year of Edward the first, 1292, when Philip the
last Lord Marmyon died seized of this manor, holden by barony and the
service of champion to the kings of England on their coronation day;
{63a} and seized also of the castle of Tamworth in Warwickshire, held
therewith as parcel of his barony, but by the service of knight’s fees,
to attend the king in his wars in Wales. {63b}  This Philip had only
female issue, and between them his great estates here, in Warwickshire,
Leicestershire, and elsewhere, were divided.  By this partition, the
manor and barony of Scrivelsby were allotted to Joan, the youngest
daughter, by whose grand-daughter and heir the same passed in marriage to
Sir John Dymoke, who, with Margaret his wife, had livery thereof in the
twenty-third year of Edward the third.

At the coronation of Richard the second, Sir John Dymoke claimed in right
of his wife, to perform the office of champion; but this right was
counterclaimed by Baldwin Freville, who as lord of Tamworth, also claimed
to perform that service; but the commissioners of the court of claims,
deciding in favor of Sir John Dymoke, he performed that office; and from
that period to the present time, nearly five hundred years, their male
issue have continued in possession of the same inheritance.  The present
champion, Lewis Dymoke, Esquire, is the sixteenth of his family, from Sir
John Dymoke, who has inherited that high and singular office.

The chief part of Scrivelsby Court, the ancient baronial seat, was
destroyed by fire, between fifty and sixty years ago.  In the part
consumed was a very large hall, on the pannels of the wainscottings of
which were depicted the various arms and alliances of the family, through
all its numerous and far traced descents.  The loss has been in some
degree compensated for, by the addition which the present proprietor has
recently made, to those parts which escaped the ravages of the fire.

The church is a small building, consisting of a nave, with a north aisle,
and a chancel.  At the eastern end of the aisle are two tombs, on one of
which is the figure of a knight, in chain armour, cross-legged; on the
other that of a lady, with a lion at her feet.  By the side of these is
the tomb of Sir Robert Dymoke, who was champion at the coronations of
Richard the third, Henry the seventh, and Henry the eighth; by the last
of whom he was made a knight banneret.  On the top of the tomb is a plate
of brass, on which is sculptured his figure in full armour, in a
recumbent posture, with his helmet under his head, and a lion at his
feet.  Above him is a shield, containing arms, and under him is the
following inscription:

    “Here liethe the Body of sir Robert Demoke of Screvelsby knight &
    baronet who departed owt of this present lyfe the xv day of Apryl in
    ye yere of our lord god mdlxv upon whose sowle almighte god have m’ci
    Amen.” {64}

The shield contains these arms:

1.  DYMOKE.  Sable, two lions passant in pale argent, ducally crowned or.
2.  MARMYON.  Vairè, a fesse gules, frettè or.
3.  HEBDEN.  Ermine, five fusils in fesse gules.
4.  RYE.  Gules, on a bend argent three ears of rye proper.
5.  WELLES.  Or, a lion rampant double tailed sable.
6.  ENGAINE.  Gules, a fesse dauncette between six crosselets or.
7.  WATERTON.  Barry of six ermine and gules, three crescents sable.
8.  HASTINGS.  Or, a manche gules.
9.  LUDLOW.  Azure, three lions passant guardant in pale, argent.
10.  SPARROW.  Argent, six martlets sable, three, two and one; on a chief
indented gules, two swords in saltire, points upwards, proper, between
two lions heads erased.

Beside these arms, the sides and ends of the tomb were ornamented with
others contained in eight shields of brass, none of which are now
remaining.

On the floor of the aisle is a stone which has once contained a brass
figure, with corner shields and an inscription, all which are now gone.

On the floor at the south side of the communion table is a plate of
copper, on which is this inscription:

    “Under this Stone lyes Sir Charles Dymoke, Knight, who was Champion
    at the Coronation of King James the 2d.  On his left hand lyes the
    Lady Dymoke; next to her, the Honourable Lewis Dymoke, their youngest
    son; next to him lies Capt. Dymoke, the eldest son of Sir Charles,
    who died in France; next to him, Mrs. Dymoke, Daughter of Sir
    Charles; at the head of Sir Charles, lyes Mrs. Eliz. Dymoke, the
    youngest daughter of Sir Charles Dymoke.”

On the floor at the north side of the communion table, is a stone,
containing this inscription:

    “Here lyeth the Body of the Honourable CHARLES DYMOKE Esq. of
    Scrielsby, Champion of England, who departed this life the 17th day
    of January, and in the year of our Lord, 1702.

    “This Gravestone was laid at the proper cost and charge of His widow,
    Jane Dymoke, and in the year 1726.”

Against the south wall of the chancel is a very handsome marble monument,
ornamented with a bust of the individual whose memory it perpetuates, at
the top is a shield containing the arms of DYMOKE, with the crest, a
sword erect; and underneath is the following inscription:

    “Near this place lieth Interr’d the Body of the Honorable LEWIS
    DYMOKE, Esq. late Champion of England, who performed that service at
    the Coronation of King George the 1st and King George the 2d.  He was
    the youngest Son of Sir Charles Dymoke and Eleanor his wife, eldest
    Daughter of the first Lord Rockingham.  He departed this Life on the
    5th of February, 1760, in the 91st Year of his Age.”

On the north side of the chancel is a mural tablet containing this
inscription:

    “Sacred to the Memory of the Honourable JOHN DYMOKE of Scrivelsby, in
    this county, Champion of England, who performed that service at the
    Coronation of His Majesty George 3d, and whose body lieth interred in
    a Vault near this place: He departed this life, March 6th, 1784.
    Aged 52 years.”

Against the south wall is the following inscription on a small marble
tablet:

    “Sacred to the Memory of LEWIS JONES, Esquire, of Great Hale in this
    County, who departed this Life May 1st 1786.  Aged 71 Years.”

The rectory, united in 1741 to that of the adjoining village of Dalderby,
is in the presentation of the lord of the manor.

On the inclosure of Wildmore Fen, pursuant to an act of parliament
obtained for that purpose in 1801, a portion thereof was allotted to this
parish, in lieu of right of common.

By the returns of 1811, this parish at that period contained 22 houses,
and 126 inhabitants.




BOLINGBROKE.


SITUATION, &c.


BOLINGBROKE, a decayed market town, is distant about eight miles south
east from Horncastle, and gives name to the soke wherein it is situated.
The town is seated on a clear, rapid brook, from which the name is
derived, and which runs along a peculiar deep recess of rugged sand-stone
hills, which suddenly terminate at the northern border of the adjacent
fen district.  Embayed amid these deep declivities, and having but one
narrow outlet into the level land, it is a matter of no surprize that its
importance as a place of security was not overlooked in the feodal times,
when it became further strengthened by a castle.

  [Picture: Remains of Bolingbroke Castle, from a drawing taken in 1813]



THE MANOR.


The manor appears to have been, from an early period, connected with the
dignity of the Earldom of Lincoln.  Ranulph, an illustrious nobleman,
marrying Lucia, widow of Roger de Romara, sister, and heiress of Morcar,
the Saxon Earl of Northumberland and Lincoln, delivered the estates,
amongst which was this lordship, to Henry the first, for the dignity of
the Earldom of Chester.  Against this, William de Romara, son of Lucia by
her former husband, appealed to the king, but in vain.  William however
strengthening by his interest the rebellion in Normandy which had been
raised by Robert, the eldest son of the conqueror, and brother of the
king, Henry, to appease his wrath, and obtain his favor, was in the
twenty-second year of his reign, induced to restore to him the estates of
his mother Lucia, and invest him with the Earldom of Lincoln.  About the
same time asserting the rights of the Empress Maud, in her contentions
with Stephen for the throne, he greatly contributed to her early
successes, particularly at the seige of Lincoln.  After this, exchanging
certain lands in Normandy with Robert de Tillol for the lordships of
Hareby, Enderby, and Hundleby, parts of this soke, William was invited by
the security of the situation, to erect his castle at Bolingbroke.

By his wife Maud, the daughter of Richard de Redvers, he had issue a son
named William, who married Hawise daughter of Stephen Earl of Albemarle;
but dying in the life time of his father, the estates descended to his
son, also called William.  This William, the third of that name, to
further improve this fortress, and add to the advantages of its
situation, procured from Simon Briton, who also held lands in these
parts, remission of all his claims in the whole marsh of Bolingbroke, and
from Jeffrey Fitz Stephens, the superior of the Knights Templar, a full
release of their interest in all the fens belonging to this manor, and
its soke, which William de Romara his grandfather had given to them.

This last mentioned individual of the family of Romara died without
issue, and in him the male line of the family ceased, as appears from
Gilbert de Gaunt, after being a suppliant prisoner when fighting on the
side of Stephen at the siege of Lincoln, and compelled by the first
William de Romara to marry his daughter Hawise, becoming in her right
possessor of this manor, and receiving also the Earldom of Lincoln.

Gilbert de Gaunt, died in the second year of the reign of Henry the
second, and left issue, two daughters, Alice and Gunnora; the former of
whom was married to Simon de St. Liz, Earl of Huntingdon, who is said to
have enjoyed, during her life time, the Earldom of Lincoln, and with it
this lordship.  Alice as well as her sister Gunnora dying without issue,
their uncle Robert de Gaunt, though unallied by blood, became their heir,
and possessed himself of these estates.  Gilbert his son succeeded him;
but joining the cause of the barons against King John, and afterwards
against his son and successor, Henry the third, he was defeated at
Lincoln, taken prisoner, and these estates conferred upon Ranulph de
Meschines, surnamed de Blundeville, Earl of Chester; who, being third in
descent from Ranulph Earl of Chester, by his wife Lucia, the widow of
Roger de Romara, and sister of Morcar the Saxon Earl of Lincoln, had,
independent of the claims on his sovereign for aiding in firmly
establishing his family on the throne, a natural right, superior to that
of the family of de Gaunt.  Ranulph de Blundeville dying without issue,
his sisters became his co-heiresses; but he had during his life time
assigned by charter to one of them, named Hawise, the Earldom of Lincoln,
and with it this manor and castle.

Robert, son and heir of Sayer de Quincy, Earl of Winchester, marrying
Hawise, left issue, a daughter, Margaret, who was married to John de
Laci, a descendant of the Barons of Pontefract.  John de Laci received
from Henry the third a charter of confirmation of the Earldom of Lincoln,
and the inheritances which he possessed by his wife Margaret de Quincy.

Edmund his son dying before his mother, did not inherit the Earldom,
though he received the tertium denarium of the county: he left issue,
Henry, John, and Margaret, the former of whom succeeded to this manor and
the Earldom of Lincoln; and is said to have been the most exalted
nobleman of his time.  He is stated to have been illustrious in counsel,
undaunted in the fight, chief among the warriors of his country, and in
fine, the brightest ornament of the reign. {69}  His sons dying young, he
bequeathed by will all his possessions to the heirs of Edmund
Plantagenet, in case of failure of issue by his daughter Alice.  Thomas,
Earl of Lancaster, son of Edmund Plantagenet, marrying Alice, held in her
right, the estates of her father Henry de Laci, who, on his death bed,
desirous that his son in law should be ennobled not only by the attendant
riches, but also by the influence of his example, enjoined him to devote
his power to secure the liberties of his country.  But the proud and
resolute spirit of the Earl of Lancaster needed no such injunctions to
spur him on to action.  Indignant that Hugh de Spenser should enjoy the
favor of his sovereign, Edward the second, he after effecting the
destruction of Piers Gaveston, broke out into open rebellion: defeated
however at Boroughbridge, he was ignominiously put to death at his castle
of Pontefract, and his estates forfeited to the crown.  The inheritances
which were, as has been before noticed, the right of his wife, were still
reserved to her; but having borne an indifferent reputation for chastity,
following the impulses of her amours in the life time of her late
husband, and after his death marrying without the consent of the king to
Eubold le Estrange, the king with whom but trivial pretences were
sufficient for abridging the powers of any individual allied to his
haughty relatives of the house of Lancaster, seized for this breach of
fealty, or homage, all the inheritance which she held of the crown in
chief, among which were this manor, and that of Denbigh, and conferred
the whole on his favorite Hugh de Spenser.

Henry, brother of Thomas the late Earl of Lancaster, procured in the
first parliament after the accession of Edward the third, a remission of
the forfeited estates of the family; and upon the death of the countess
Alice, the wife of his late brother, her honors and splendid inheritances
devolved to him, partly by the will of her father Henry de Laci, and
partly by reason of a render made by him to Edward the first, and a
re-grant by charter from that monarch to the heirs of Henry de Laci, with
remainder to the heirs of Edmund Plantagenet.

Henry Earl of Lancaster died without male issue, but left two daughters
Maud and Blanche; the former of whom married William of Bavaria, and left
no issue; but Blanche became the sole heir of her father, and married
John of Gaunt, who, by reason of the inheritances, was created Duke of
Lancaster.  By her he had issue, at the castle at this place, the
celebrated Henry of Bolingbroke; upon whose accession to the throne, the
whole patrimony through the line of Lancaster became invested in the
crown, and in his reign was counted one of the manorial possessions of
the king, denominated honors.



THE CASTLE.


On the south side of the town is the scite of the castle, which is now
only to be distinguished by the traces of its foundations, encompassed by
a moat.

The seclusion of this spot amongst steep hills, with only an opening to
the level country, southward, rendered it in the early mode of warfare a
desirable situation for a place of defence, since it was at all times
secure from the emergencies of a sudden surprise.  The advantages of such
a situation were not overlooked by William de Romara, who about the early
part of the reign of king Stephen, erected his castle at this place.

From the testimony of Mr. Gervase Holles, who is the only person that has
left us a description of this castle, it appears to have been a very
spacious square edifice, characterized in its construction by strength
and uniformity, and containing beside numerous apartments, all the
conveniences of warfare. {71}  By Queen Elizabeth it was improved by
elegant and extensive erections, and though afterwards neglected, yet it
remained a place of importance down to the time of the civil wars in the
reign of Charles the first, when for some time it withstood a siege by
the parliamentary forces.

After the defeat of the royal army at Winceby, this castle was compelled
to yield to the army of the parliament, who, after dismantling it, left
it silently to decay.  For a many years part of a circular building, said
to be the gate-house, continued standing; but in May 1815, this last
remaining fragment of the once formidable structure fell to the ground.

To the east of the enclosure may be seen the entrenchments, behind which
the assailants, in 1643, protected themselves in their attack on this
castle.



THE CHURCH.


The church being occupied by the parliamentary forces when they stormed
the castle, was almost entirely demolished by the cannon of that
fortress.

The part now remaining, is situated a short distance north of the scite
of the castle, and consists of a tower, and a part appropriated for
public worship, which was once the southern aisle of the original
edifice.  It is built of sand stone, and if the delicate tracery of its
windows be excepted, it contains but little architectural beauty.  These
windows were once ornamented with richly stained glass of which not a
fragment is now remaining. {73}

There is yet preserved in this church the mutilated remains of an
embroidered cloth for the communion table, said to have been wrought by
one of the Duchesses of Lancaster.

Two chantries, which formerly were attached to this church, were
suppressed at the dissolution of religious houses, in the twenty-sixth
year of the reign of Henry the eighth.

The rectory is in the presentation of Lady Eyre of Mortlake, in Surrey.



THE TOWN.


At so early a period as the time of forming the Domesday survey, this
town appears to have arisen into some consideration as a place of trade,
being possessed of a market, which however is in that record denominated
a new one. {74}

For a many years it was considered one of the principal market towns of
the county of Lincoln; but its trade, for some time previous to the
destruction of the castle, had been gradually withdrawing to other places
more conveniently situated; and afterwards the town fell rapidly into
decay, and its market became wholly unfrequented.

Although it may be at present identified as a mere village; yet its
widely detached houses, partially paved streets, and grass grown market
place, connected with the mounds of the castle which once adorned the
spot, evince sufficiently that there has been a time when destitution was
not the characteristic of the town of Bolingbroke.

An unsuccessful attempt has lately been made to revive the market, on a
portion of land allotted to this parish on the enclosure of the fens, in
lieu of right of common thereon.  An annual fair on the tenth of July, is
held both at this town and on the fen allotment.

There is a free school at this place, founded and endowed in 1588, by a
Mr. Chamberlain.

In 1811 this parish contained 75 houses, and 361 inhabitants.

Bolingbroke gives the title of viscount to the family of St. John, of
Lydiard Tregoze, in Wiltshire.




REVESBY.


REVESBY is situated at the distance of six miles south from Horncastle,
on the road from that place to Boston, and is included in the soke of
Bolingbroke.

What now constitutes the parish of Revesby, appears formerly to have been
three distinct manors, Revesby, Thoresby, and Seithesby; the greater part
of which was the property of William de Romara, Earl of Lincoln.  In the
year 1142 he founded a Cistertian monastery at this place, and previous
to endowing it with the whole of his possessions here, he negotiated
exchanges with the other proprietors, by which he was enabled to give the
entirety of the three manors to his new monastery. {76}

 [Picture: Revesby Abbey, Seat of The Right Hon. Sir Joseph Banks, Bart.]

To add to the solemnity of the ceremony of foundation, the Earl on this
occasion manumitted several slaves, who had petitioned for their liberty.
One of them, called Wilhelmus Medicus, was doubtless a physician;
another, Rogerus Barkarius, probably a shepherd: the surnames of persons
at that time being derived from their profession.  A person named Roger
Barker resided until lately at a place called Stickney Wydale.  This
place belongs to the parish of Revesby, though about four miles distant,
and is supposed to have been given to the monks on condition of their
keeping Nordyke Causeway, formerly a dangerous pass, in repair.

Beside the endowment of William de Romara, the monastery was enriched by
numerous other benefactions.  At the dissolution of religious houses, its
possessions with all its rights were granted to Charles Brandon, Duke of
Suffolk; and on the death of his two infant sons, who survived him only a
short time, their extensive possessions were divided among the heirs
general.  On this division, Revesby fell to the lot of the Carsey family,
who resided here several years, and afterwards sold it to the Lord
Treasurer Burleigh, from whom it descended to the first and second Earls
of Exeter; the latter of whom settled it on his grandson Henry Howard,
the third son of the Earl of Berkshire.  About a century ago it was sold
by the descendants of Henry Howard, to Joseph Banks, Esquire, the great
grandfather of the Right Honorable Sir Joseph Banks, Baronet, who is the
present possessor.

The seat of the proprietor was built by Craven Howard, nephew and heir of
Henry Howard; but has been much enlarged by the family of Banks.  Part of
an ancient mansion, formerly the residence of the abbots, now forms the
offices.  The monastery, which stood at a considerable distance, has long
been entirely demolished.

The church, which is a small neat structure, was re-built by the before
mentioned Joseph Banks, Esquire.  It is a donative of exempt
jurisdiction.

At the east end of the chancel is a tablet containing this inscription:

    “Dedicated to the Memmorie of NEHEMIAH RAWSON, Esq.  A Member of this
    Common Wealth, and a Justice of Peace.  Hee Married Frances the
    Daughter of Thomas Knightley of Brough Hall in the County of
    Stafford, Esq.  By Whome hee had Issue Six Daughters, Elizabeth
    Married to Richard Parkes of Lutton, Gent.  Hanna to Theophilus Hartt
    of Birkwood Esq.  Abigal to Daniell Hartt of London Grocer, Sarah,
    Rebecca and Mary, Dyed Younge, he Departed this Life in January 1657.
    Aged 80 Yeares.”

At the same end is another tablet, with the following inscription, and a
shield containing a bend, in the sinister chief three crosses fitchy:

    “To the perpetual Memorie of HENRY HOWARD third Son of Thomas Howard
    Earle of Barkshire by Elizabeth Daughter and heiresse to William
    Cecill Earle of Exeter his Wife who Departed this Life in the XLIIII
    Yeare of his age in December MDCLXIII.

    “This Monument was Dedicated and Erected by his Nephew whom hee made
    his heir and successor to this Mannor of Revesby and his Lands in
    Lincolnshire, Craven Howard Son of William Howard who was 4th Son of
    the Earle and Countesse of Barkshire (before mentioned) in the yeare
    1691.”

On the north side of the chancel is a large marble monument, surmounted
by the bust of the individual whose memory it perpetuates, and ornamented
with a shield containing the arms of BANKS, Sable, a cross or, between
four flowers de luce argent.  This monument contains the following
inscription:

                                  “H. S. E.

    “JOSEPHUS BANKS Armiger ex antiqua familia apud Bank-Newton, in agro
    Eborac. Oriundus.  Juris prudentiæ studio operam dedit illamq.
    feliciter exercuit.

    “In honorem Dei Ecclesiam hanc vetustate collabentem, a solo
    restituit Vicinium Ptochotrophium in X Senum aut Mancorum subsidium a
    fundamentis extruxit.

    “Bis ad suprema Regni Comitia Senator Grimsbeiæ in Lincolnia, et
    Totenesiæ in Devonia.  Electus, Regi suo et Patriæ utriamque vicem
    fideliter inservivit.

    “Maritus et Pater benignus Amicus sine fuco Pacti et Promissi sui
    observantissimus Annos LXII. vixit XXVII. Septemb. A.D. MDCCXXVII.
    obiit.

    “Liberos vidit adultos Josephum et Mariam Quorum hanc Dno. Francisco
    Whichcote Barnto. nuptam, Patre superstite præpropera mors abripuit;
    Optimo Parenti superstes Ille.

                                “M. H. P. C.”

Near to the church are ten alms-houses, on the centre of the front of
which is the following inscription:

    “Joseph Banks Esq. Lord of Revesby by his Will Directed the Building
    of these Almshouses for Ten poor People & Endowed the Same with Fifty
    pounds a year.  He Departed this Life the 27th of Sept. 1727 Leaving
    Joseph Banks Esq. his only Son Heir who in Pursuance of his Father’s
    Will erected this Anno 1728.”

In this parish are two tumuli, each about one hundred feet diameter, and
about one hundred feet apart, which have been formerly surrounded by a
fosse.  Dr. Stukeley supposes them to have been either the places of
sepulture of two British Kings, or places of religious worship. {79}

A fair is held at Revesby on the second Monday after old Michaelmas day
annually.

In 1811, the parish contained 99 houses, and 498 inhabitants.




KIRKSTEAD.


KIRKSTEAD, anciently called Cristed, is situated on the east bank of the
Witham, in the hundred of Gartree, and is about three miles distant from
Tattershall, and eight from Horncastle.  Formerly it was a hamlet of
Kirkby super Bane, but for many years it has been considered as a
separate parish.

                       [Picture: Kirkstead Chapel]

The manor, with that of Tattershall, was among the several estates given
by the conqueror to Eudo, one of his Norman followers.  His son Hugh fitz
Eudo, called the Breton, founded a Cistertian Abbey here in 1139, and
endowed it with his possessions in this place.  Afterwards the monks,
considering the situation unhealthy, petitioned Robert, the son of the
founder, to allow them to remove the abbey to some other place; but
though they obtained permission, yet it does not appear that the affair
was proceeded in any further.  The abbey had subsequently many
benefactors, and acquired very extensive possessions.

At the dissolution of religious houses, the Kirkstead estate was given by
Henry the eighth, to Charles Duke of Suffolk; and on the division of his
estates after the death of his two sons, who survived him but a short
time, it reverted to the king as one of the heirs general of the family,
and was subsequently given to Lord Clinton and Saye, afterwards Earl of
Lincoln.  This estate descended to Mr. Daniel Disney, in right of his
wife Catherine, the youngest daughter of Henry Fynes Clinton, Esquire,
and grand-daughter of the second Earl of Lincoln.  In the year 1792 it
was sold by Mr. Disney Fytch, grandson of Mr. Daniel Disney, to the
present possessor, Richard Ellison, Esquire, of Sudbroke Holme, near
Lincoln.

Of the Abbey a small ruin only remains: but from a plate of “The
Ichnography of the Monastery of Kirsted Linc.” in Stukeley’s Itinerarium
Curiosum, the buildings appear to have been extensive.

South of the ruin of the Abbey is the Chapel, a very curious building,
which according to tradition was built previous to the monastery.  It is
of early English architecture, having lancet windows at the sides and
east end, and an ox-eye window over the entrance at the west end.  The
roof is beautifully groined, the ribs springing from corbel tables; and
against the south wall on the inside, is a rude figure in stone of a
knight templar, with the front part of his helmet in the shape of a
cross.  For many years the roof of this building was covered with thatch,
but in 1790 it was removed and a covering of tiles substituted.  At that
time also the bell, which had previously hung in a tree, was placed over
the west end of the building.

This chapel is a donative of exempt jurisdiction, but appears to have had
no stipend for the officiating minister until it came into the possession
of Mr. Daniel Disney, who being a presbyterian, appointed a minister of
that persuasion to perform service there, with a salary of £30. per
annum. {81}  In order that the tenets which he professed might not want
support in his parish, in 1720 he settled certain lands upon five
trustees, the profits of which were to be applied to the maintenance of a
presbyterian minister at this place.  This gift he afterwards confirmed
by his will in 1732, and in addition, bequeathed to the trustees the use
of the chapel and chapel ground for the same purpose.  On the death or
alienation of the minister, the trustees were to present the names of two
to the lord of the manor, who was to appoint one of them, and on his
neglect or refusal, the trustees themselves were to make the appointment.
Ministers continued to be nominated by the prescribed form until the
death of Mr. Dunkley, who had for many years received the bequeathed
stipend, and whose demise took place in 1794.  On that occasion the
present owner of the manor took possession of the estates which had been
conveyed to the trustees, and appointed to the chapel a minister of the
Church of England, paying him £30. per annum.  The trustees, however,
recovered possession of the estates, by an action of ejectment, tried at
Lincoln summer assizes, 1812, but not of the Chapel.  Owing to some
difficulties in the arrangement of the affairs, the presbyterian form of
worship is not yet re-established here.

This village gave birth to the celebrated monk Hugh de Kirkstead, who is
styled by Fuller “a Benedictine Cistertian Bernardine Monk, or, as it may
be termed a treble refined Christian.”  He, and Serlo, one of his own
order, joined in composing a chronicle of the Cistertians from their
first arrival in England in 1131, to their own time, about 1210.

In the fourteenth volume of the “Archeologia of the Society of
Antiquaries” is an engraving of an ancient iron candlestick of a very
singular construction, six of which were found in cleaning the bed of the
river Witham near this place.

This village contained, according to the returns of 1811, 26 houses and
110 inhabitants.




TATTERSHALL.


SITUATION.


TATTERSHALL or Tateshall is a small market town in the wapentake of
Gartree.  It is situated on the banks of the river Bane, near its
junction with the river Witham, and is distant nine miles south west from
Horncastle.  It is a place of considerable antiquity, having been a Roman
military station; traces of two encampments of that warlike people being
still visible, at a short distance from the town, in a place called
Tattershall park.  Several Roman coins have also been found in different
parts of the parish.

      [Picture: Tattershall Church and Castle, from the South East]



THE MANOR.


Shortly after the conquest, the lordship of Tattershall, together with
the hamlet of Tattershall Thorpe, and several other estates, was given by
King William to Eudo and Pinso, two Norman nobles, who had attended him
into England, but who, though sworn brothers in war, were not otherwise
related.  On the division of the estates between these chieftains, this
manor became the property of Eudo, who fixed his residence here.  Upon
his death his estates descended to his son, Hugh Fitz Eudo, who, in the
year 1139, founded an abbey for Cistertian monks at the neighbouring
village of Kirkstead.

Hugh was succeeded by his son Robert, who left issue a son named Philip.
Philip, after serving the office of sheriff of Berkshire in the seventh
year of the reign of Richard the second, and also of Lincolnshire in the
eighth, ninth and tenth years of the same king, was succeeded by his son
Robert, the second of that name, who, in the year 1201, procured from
King John, by means of a present of a well-trained goshawk, a grant to
hold a weekly market on Thursday, on this manor.  Robert was followed by
his son of the same name, who about the year 1230, obtained from Henry
the third a licence to build a castle at this place, together with a
grant of free warren in all his demesne lands.  The male line of Eudo was
continued in regular descent, by Robert the fourth, fifth, sixth, and
seventh; upon the death of the latter of whom in his minority, it became
extinct, and the inheritance was divided between his three sisters.
Tattershall became the portion of Joan, one of the co-heiresses, who
married Sir Robert Driby, and who had issue by him a daughter and heiress
Alice, afterwards married to Sir William Bernack.  John, the son of this
latter marriage, was succeeded by William, who died a minor, and left his
sister Maud his heiress.

The Fitz Eudos, from the place, assumed the cognomen of Tateshall, and by
that title had summons to parliament among the great barons of the realm.

Maud, the heiress of the Bernack family, married Sir Ralph, afterwards
Lord Cromwell, who, in her right, became lord of this manor; and upon his
death, which happened on the twenty-seventh day of August in the year
1398, left his son Ralph his heir, who died in 1416, and was succeeded by
a son of the same name.  In the year 1433, this latter Ralph was by Henry
the sixth appointed Treasurer of the Exchequer.  He died without issue on
the fourth of January, 1455; whereby his two nieces, the daughters of his
sister, the wife of Sir Richard Stanhope, became his co-heiresses.

It does not appear into whose hands the Tattershall estate fell after the
death of the Lord Treasurer Cromwell, until the year 1487, when Henry the
seventh granted the manor to his mother, Margaret, Countess of Richmond,
and in the following year entailed it on the Duke of Richmond.  The Duke
dying without issue, Henry the eighth in 1520, granted it to Charles Duke
of Suffolk, by letters patent, which were confirmed by Edward the sixth,
in the year 1547.

On the death of the two infant sons of the Duke of Suffolk, who survived
their father only a short time, this manor again came into the possession
of the king as one of the heirs general of the family.  By letters
patent, dated the fifth of September, 1551, Edward the sixth granted the
castle with the manor, in fee, to Edward Lord Clinton and Saye,
afterwards Earl of Lincoln.  The Earl dying in 1584, was succeeded by his
son Henry, who died in 1616, leaving issue a son and heir Thomas, who
survived his father only two years, and was followed by his son
Theophilus, who died in 1667.  The next possessor was Edward, who was the
grandson of Theophilus, and who died at Tattershall in 1692; in him
terminated the male line of the Clinton family.  Upon his death, without
issue, the Tattershall estate became the property of his cousin Bridget,
who married Hugh Fortescue, Esquire, by whom she had a son and heir Hugh,
created in 1746, Baron Fortescue, and Earl Clinton.  Upon his death in
1751, his half brother Matthew succeeded him, but dying in 1785, the
Tattershall estate descended to his eldest son Earl Fortescue, the
present possessor.

Besides the liberties of the parks, chases and free warrens, belonging to
the castle and manor of Tattershall, it also appears in the several
grants of Henry the third, Henry the fourth, Henry the seventh, Henry the
eighth, and in the grant of the liberties of Richmond fee, whereof the
castle and manor of Tattershall is a part, that to the said castle and
manor also belong the liberties of stallage, tolls of markets and fairs,
together with the privilege for all tenants and inhabitants of
Tattershall to be discharged of any tolls in fairs and markets abroad;
also the sole liberties of fishing, fowling, hawking, and hunting, in all
the said manors, chases and the precincts of them; also suits of courts
baron, waifs, estrays, treasure trove, goods and chattels of felons,
fugitives, men outlawed, and felones de se, deodands, bondmen, villains,
with their sequels; and also that neither the sheriff of the county, nor
his bailiff shall arrest within the said manor, and that no distress
taken therein shall be delivered, nor replevins granted by the sheriff,
but only by the steward of the lord of the said manor.



THE CASTLE.


About two hundred and fifty yards south-west of the town stands the
remains of the castle, a stately edifice, erected by the Lord Treasurer
Cromwell, about the year 1440.

William of Worcester states, that the Lord Treasurer expended in building
the principal and other towers of this castle above four thousand marks;
his household there consisted of one hundred persons, and his suite, when
he rode to London, commonly of one hundred and twenty horsemen; and his
annual expenditure was about £5000. {86a}

This castle was originally intended as a place of defence, and was
surrounded by two fosses, the inner one faced with brick, great part of
which is now remaining.  Formerly it was of great extent, but was
dilapidated in the civil wars between the unfortunate Charles the first
and his parliament: for the damages thereby sustained, Theophilus, fourth
Earl of Lincoln, petitioned parliament in the year 1649.

The part now remaining, is a rectangular brick tower of exquisite
workmanship, about one hundred feet in height, divided into four stories,
and flanked by four octagonal turrets; and is raised on ponderous arches,
forming spacious vaults, which extend through the angles of the building,
into the bases of the turrets. {86b}  Under the crown of these vaults was
a deep well, which is now filled up.

   [Picture: South-West View of Tattershall Castle, with a Ground Plan]

The walls are of great thickness, particularly that on the east side, in
which are several galleries and narrow rooms, arched in a curious manner,
through which communications were obtained with the principal apartments
in the several stories, from the great stairs in the south-east turret.
The east wall also contains the chimnies.

The windows are of the pointed order, well-proportioned, and contain
tracery; those on the south, west and north sides are large, and from
them the principal apartments received light; those on the east are
smaller, being designed to give light only to the rooms and galleries in
that wall.

The main walls were carried to the top of the fourth story, where the
tower was covered by a grand platform, or flat roof, which, together with
the several floors, is entirely destroyed.  Surrounding this part of the
tower are very deep machicolations, upon which, and part of the main
walls, is a parapet of great thickness, with arches, intended to protect
the persons employed over the machicolations.  Upon these arches is a
second platform, enclosed with a parapet and embrasures; above which the
embattled turrets rise to a considerable height; three of them
terminating in cones covered with lead.  The cone of the fourth turret is
demolished.

On the ground floor is an elegantly carved stone chimney piece,
embattled, and ornamented alternately with arms, and treasury purses with
the motto “nay je droit.”

                               _First Row_.

1.  Ten roundels.

3.  A lion rampant.  FITZ ALAYN, or BELLERS.

5.  Vairè a fesse.  MARMION.

6.  Ermine a fesse.  BERNACK.

8.  A bend and chief, CROMWELL, quartering a cheque and chief, TATESHALL,
impaling a fesse dauncette between ten billets, DEINCOURT.

10.  CROMWELL and TATESHALL quarterly.

                              _Second Row_.

2.  Bendy of ten.  CLIFTON.

4.  DEINCOURT.

5.  Three cinquefoils. a dexter canton.  DRIBY.

7.  Barry of six, a bend, GREY of ROTHERFIELD.

In the point of the surbase arch of this chimney piece is the coat of
CROMWELL.

Over this is another embattled chimney piece adorned with the following
arms and devices, in circles:

1.  Treasury purse and motto.
2.  TATESHALL.
3.  Saint Michael and the dragon.
4.  Quarterly, CROMWELL and TATESHALL, impaling DEINCOURT.
5.  CROMWELL quartering TATESHALL; crest, a helmet; supporters two wild
men.
6.  Under an arch, a man tearing a lion.
7.  A lion rampant.
8.  Treasury purse and motto.

Above, between these circles, are seven small shields, with these arms:
DEINCOURT, DRIBY, CROMWELL, one broken, CROMWELL, TATESHALL, and
DEINCOURT; and below seven purses.

The two upper stories also contain ornamented chimney pieces, but they
are inferior to those described.

From the top of the castle is a very extensive view of the surrounding
country.

             [Picture: Chimney Pieces in Tattershall Castle]

Between the castle and the church stands an ancient brick building,
which, from the stile of architecture, appears to be coeval with the
castle, and is now inhabited.  On the west of the castle is another
remain, apparently of the same date.  Each of these buildings is situated
between the outer and inner fosse.

The principal entrance to the castle, with its portcullis and towers, was
standing at the north-east corner of the enclosure, when Buck made his
drawing in 1726.



THE COLLEGIATE CHURCH.


In the seventeenth year of the reign of Henry the sixth, a licence was
obtained from that monarch, directed to Ralph Cromwell, Knight, Henry
Bishop of Winchester, Cardinal of England, William Alnewick, Bishop of
Lincoln, John Scroope, Knight, Walter Hungerford, Knight, Walter Talbois,
Esquire, and William Paston, patrons of the parish church of Tattershall,
in the county of Lincoln, empowering them to convert the said church,
into a collegiate church or college, in honour of the Holy Trinity, the
blessed Virgin Mary, St. Peter the Apostle, St. John the Baptist, and St.
John the Evangelist.  The establishment was to consist of seven
chaplains, one of whom to be custos or master, six secular clerks, and
six choristers.  The licence further authorized them to erect a perpetual
alms-house on their own ground, being parcel of the castle and manor of
Tattershall, next to the church-yard, containing ten acres, for thirteen
poor persons of both sexes; with mansion houses and buildings for the
said master, chaplains, clerks, choristers and their servants; with
cloisters, enclosures, gardens, orchards and all other conveniences; and
to assign the same to the said master and chaplains; who were to be a
body corporate, and have a common seal for the execution of all business,
with power to sue and be sued, and to purchase, receive and hold lands,
tenements, and other revenues, ecclesiastical or secular, to the value of
£200. per annum, over and above the advowson and yearly value of the said
church of Tattershall, and the houses and ten acres of land aforesaid,
without fine or fee to the king or his heirs.

The Lord Treasurer, in pursuance of this licence, began to convert the
parish church into a college; but it appears that he died before it was
finished, as, by his will, dated a short time previous to his decease, he
bequeathed his body to be buried in the collegiate church of Tattershall,
until the whole fabrick should be rebuilt, and then to be removed into
the midst of the choir.

The church was afterwards finished nearly as it remains at this time; and
mansion houses and other necessary buildings were erected for the use of
the foundation, as well as the alms houses mentioned in the licence.
Among the inscriptions in the MS. of Lincolnshire Church Notes, taken by
Mr. Gervase Holles, are the names of several persons who belonged to this
establishment.

This college received several benefactions, and its possessions
progressively increased to a considerable magnitude.  In the thirty-sixth
year of Henry the eighth, the whole was granted to Charles, Duke of
Suffolk, who at that time was possessor of the castle and manor.

The church stands about eighty yards east of the castle, near the outer
fosse, and is a beautiful and spacious stone structure in the form of a
cross, consisting of a square tower, a nave with five arches on a side,
and eight clerestory windows placed in pairs, a transept, and a choir.
On the north side is a porch, on which are sculptured the arms of William
of Wainflete, Bishop of Winchester: formerly there were two porches on
the south side also bearing the arms of the same bishop; but these have
been some time since removed.  Over the great eastern window is a richly
ornamented niche, in which a statue once stood: the wall above the
western door is likewise ornamented with thirteen blank shields.  The
cloisters, which were on the south side of the chancel, are entirely
demolished.

In the south wall of the chancel are three stone stalls and a piscina,
with a cornice charged with various animals; on each side of the transept
is also a piscina.  There is a handsome rood-loft between the nave and
choir, now used as a singing gallery.

The windows of the choir were once enriched with beautiful stained glass,
which was removed in the year 1754, by the Earl of Exeter, on condition
that it should be replaced with plain glass: but this being neglected to
be done, the choir remained about fifty years with unglazed windows; and
being thus exposed to the weather, the elegantly carved oak stalls, the
rich screens, and other ornamental work, fell entirely to decay. {90}
The choir has, within these few years, been repaired by the present Earl
Fortescue, and fitted up in a plain but neat manner.

The windows of the nave and transept were also enriched with stained
glass containing the legendary histories of St. Guthlake, St. Catherine,
and other saints, a few fine fragments of which are preserved in two of
the transept windows.

On the floor before the communion table is a stone which once contained a
rich brass figure of the Lord Treasurer Cromwell, habited in full plated
armour and a flowing mantle and cordon, the gauntlets reaching to the
middle joint of the fingers, a long sword across him from the middle of
the belt, and at his feet two wild men with clubs his supporters; by his
side the figure of Margaret his wife; and over them a canopy charged with
saints, and under them the following inscription:

    “Hic jacet nobilis Baro Radulphus Cromwell Miles D’ns de Cromwell
    quo’dm Thesaurarius Anglie et fundator hujus Collegii cum inclita
    consorte sua Margareta una herede d’ni Dayncourt qui quid’m Radulphus
    obiit quarto die mens. Januarij Anno d’ni Mill’o cccclv.  Et p’dicta
    Margareta obiit xv die Septe’br Anno d’ni mill’io ccccliij Quor’
    Aiab’ pp’ietur Deus Amen.”

The whole of these figures, the canopy, and the arms are gone and only
half the inscription is now remaining.

On the north side of the Lord Treasurer, is the figure in brass of Joan
Lady Cromwell, {91a} under a canopy adorned with saints, and under her
this inscription:

    “Orate p’ a’ia Johanne d’ne Cromwell que obijt decimo die martij Anno
    d’ni mill’mo cccclxxix cuj’ a’ie p’piciet’ Deus Amen.”

On the other side of the Lord Treasurer is the figure in brass of Matilda
Lady Willoughby, {91b} under a canopy charged with saints, and at her
feet the following inscription:

    “Hic jacet d’na Matilda nuper d’ni Willughby quondam uxor Roberti
    d’ni de Willughby militis ac consanguinea et heres illustris d’ni
    Radulphi nup’ dn’i Crumwell militis fundatoris hujus collegii ac
    specialis benefactrix ejusdem collegij que obijt xxxo die aug’ Anno
    Domini Mill’imo cccclxxxxvij cujus anime p’picietur om’p’ns deus
    Amen.”

The corner shields from this stone, and also those from that of Joan Lady
Cromwell are gone. {92a}  The canopies have sustained but little injury.

In the middle of the floor of the choir is the figure in brass of a
priest, under which is the following inscription to the memory of William
Moor, the second provost of this college:

    “Vir virtute vivens Will’us vulgo vocatus
    Hujus Collegii de Tateshale secundus
    Hic Eboracensis fuit eccl’ie cathedralis
    Sacre Scripture baccalaurius arte p’batus
    Octobris dena mensis cu’ luce novena
    Bil’ d’ni C quater I sexto continuat’

    Boor micuit more mitis bene morigerat’
    Prudens p’positus et egenis semp’ habundus
    Canonicus Rector et de ledenham specialis
    Jam sub tellure fit vermibus esca paratus
    Mente pia morit’ cujus corpus sepelitur
    Sp’us in celis ejus sine fine locatur.”

A brass figure of a priest, about five feet long, with the figure of the
deity on his breast, and several saints down his robe, is now loose in
the choir.  Mr. Gough, in his “Sepulchral Monuments,” describes this as
the figure of William Moor, and attached to the above inscription. {92b}

On the floor between the nave and the choir is a brass figure much worn,
under which, though scarcely legible, is this inscription:

    “Hic jacet Hugo . . . quondam . . . d’ni Rad’i de Cromwell Militis
    d’ni de Tateshale qui obiit ultimo die Septe’bris A’o d’ni mill’mo
    ccccxi cuj’ a’ie p’piciet deus Amen.” {92c}

In various parts of the floor of this church are traces of brass figures,
which are now gone, one, in particular, against the door in the north
aisle appears to have been exceedingly rich.

The south side of the transept is now partitioned off, and used as a
school, in which the children are instructed on the plan of Dr. Bell.

The living is a donative, extra judicial, in the presentation of the lord
of the manor.  It was once held by the Reverend Obadiah How, D.D. a man
of considerable learning, and the author of several theological
treatises; he died in 1685, and was buried in the church of Boston, of
which he was vicar.  It was afterwards held for more than forty years by
the Reverend Michael Taylor, who died in 1730, and was buried in the
midst of the nave of this church.

The college, which was situated on the north side of the church, is
entirely gone.  The alms-houses still remain with a small endowment.

An old building in the town, supposed to have been the parish chapel, now
forms part of a malting office.



THE TOWN.


The parish of Tattershall contains about 1555 acres of land, and the
hamlet of Tattershall Thorpe about 2589 acres, the principal part of
which is the property of the lord of the manor.

The town has derived considerable benefit from the navigable canal, which
passes through it from the river Witham to the town of Horncastle.  A
fine bridge of four arches having been thrown over the Witham, in the
place of the ferry, with a turnpike road to Sleaford, has also
contributed to the improvement of the place.

From a manuscript account of the diocese of Lincoln, taken in the year
1588, it appears that at that period Tattershall contained 236 families,
and the hamlet of Tattershall Thorpe 68.  By the returns made in the year
1811, it appears that the number of houses in Tattershall was 105, and of
inhabitants 506: Tattershall Thorpe, at the same time, contained 37
houses and 208 inhabitants.

There are two fairs holden annually at this place; one on the fifteenth
of May, the other on the twenty-fifth of September.  The market is now
held on Friday weekly.

In the market place stands an octagonal column or shaft, which was once
surmounted by a cross.  The cross has however long since been removed and
an urn substituted in its place.  On three of the shields with which this
column is ornamented these arms are sculptured, viz. CROMWELL, CROMWELL
and TATESHALL quarterly, and CROMWELL and TATESHALL impaling DEINCOURT.
The arms on the fourth shield are obliterated.

                  [Picture: Seal of Tattershall College]




TOWER ON THE MOOR.


ON an extensive moor, about four miles north of Tattershall, and about
six miles south west of Horncastle, stands the remain of a brick
building, called from its situation the _Tower on the Moor_.  It was
built by the Lord Treasurer Cromwell, and is supposed to have been an
appendage to the castle at Tattershall, from which place it is plainly
visible by reason of the flatness of the intervening country. {97}

                       [Picture: Tower on the Moor]

Of this tower only an octangular turret remains, to which fragments of
the walls adhere; it is about sixty feet in height, and contains winding
stairs of brick, now in a very ruinous condition.  Traces of the fosse,
by which it was surrounded, are still visible.




GEOLOGY AND NATURAL HISTORY OF THE SOKE AND NEIGHBOURHOOD OF HORNCASTLE.


GEOLOGY.


ALTHOUGH the Soke of Horncastle does not possess much variety in its
geological structure, yet a considerable diversity is to be found in the
formation of the adjacent elevated country, called the wolds.  On the
annexed map the denudations of the various strata in this district are
traced out, and distinguished by different colours: the order of
stratification is also exemplified by a section, of imaginary elevation,
but on the same scale as the map with respect to horizontal distance.
The section too shows a greater extent than the map to the east, where,
on account of the dip of the strata towards that quarter, it is necessary
to commence the description, although in point of distance it cannot be
properly considered within the prescribed limits of this work.

The tract of marsh land between the sea and the wolds, (No. 1.) consists
principally of unstratified clay, with admixtures of sand, and various
marine depositions.  These circumstances, together with the old sea
banks, evidence that this mass of earth has been left by the gradual
receding of the ocean.

On the west of these marshes is the rough elevated denudation of chalk,
(No. 2.) which forms the highest stratum of the wolds, and gently dips
underneath the marshes; for in boring in them for water the chalk is
always found.  The chalk is of two colours, white and red, each lying in
regular strata, which alternate frequently, the red bearing but a small
proportion to the white.  In the white, compact seams of flint, of a
light grey color, from two to six inches thick, are often met with.  In
the chalk several extraneous fossils are found.

The stratum immediately below the chalk, (No. 3.) is a coarse, brown,
pebbly sand, consisting of quartz and oxyd of iron, varying in thickness
from six to ten yards, and of uncertain appearance at its denudation.
While the different strata in these parts were exposed to the action of
the water, the sand would naturally be more affected by that element than
the superincumbent stratum of chalk; and the latter being thus left
projecting, would from the decomposing effects of the atmosphere, crumble
down, and form those various declivities which now present themselves to
view.

Beneath the sand is a bed, about fourteen yards in thickness, (No. 4.)
containing equal proportions of oolite limestone and calcareous clay of a
light grey colour.  In some parts the stone is divided by the clay into
regular strata, whilst in others it occurs in large detached pieces
imbedded in the clay.  Fossil shells, and lumps of pyrites, or sulphuret
of iron, are frequently met with in the stone.

The next stratum (No. 5.) consists of grains of quartz, for the most part
agglutinated into sandstone of different degrees of induration, and
varying in colour from a light grey to a dark brown, whilst in some parts
loose sand predominates.  In the grey variety of this stone, marine
shells of different kinds, are found in great abundance: in the brown
they occur very seldom, and not at all in the sand.  This stratum is
considerably thicker than the two incumbent ones.

The lowest visible stratum is the shale, {100a} (No. 6.) which generally
makes its appearance in vallies.  As it no where exhibits a denudated
termination, its thickness cannot be estimated, but from the great depths
in which it has been bored, without being perforated, it must be immense.
{100b}  A great variety of organic remains are also found in this
stratum.

The last division to be considered is an alluvial collection of earth,
almost entirely consisting of the spoils of the neighbouring strata in a
state of decomposition, wherein however detached pieces of the different
strata are to be found unaltered.  From this it appears that when these
parts were deluged by the water, the current set in from east to west.
As the chalk and the shale would present the largest surfaces to the
erosion of the water, they would be more extensively acted upon than the
other strata: hence the greatest part of the alluvial deposition consists
of white marle and blue; the former (No. 7.) being of the least specific
gravity, has covered the hills, while the latter with sand gravel (No.
8.) occupies the lower parts.



NATURAL HISTORY.


In the department of Natural History, this district possesses but little
which is deserving of particular notice.  Of birds there are none which
can now be considered peculiar to this part, the drainage of the fen
lands having entirely banished the great variety of aquatic birds which
used, previous to that event, to be found here.

A variety of plants, many of which are of rare occurrence in other parts,
are indigenous to this neighbourhood: a list of them is given in the
following table.

       Names of the Plants.                    Where found.
Achillea ptarmica                   Bridle road to Hemingby
Agrimonia eupatoria                 Ditto.
Alchemilla vulgaris                 Ditto.
Alisma plantago                     Ditto, wet ditches.
Allium ursinum                      Tetford Wood.
Anemone nemorosa                    Tetford and Thornton Woods.
Antirrhinum linaria                 Horncastle, dry banks.
Arabis thaliana                     Ditto, sandy grounds.
Artemisia vulgaris                  Ditto, long hedge.
Artemisia absinthium                Tetford.
Arum maculatum                      West Ashby.
Asperula odorata                    Tetford, Stovin, and Whitehall
                                    Woods
Asplenium adiantum                  Tattershall.
Berberis vulgaris                   Scrivelsby, Horncastle,
Betonica officinalis                Tetford and Stovin Woods,
Bryonia dioica                      Horncastle, West Ashby.
Campanula trachelium                Tetford Wood, Revesby.
Cardamine hirsuta                   Bridle road to Hemingby.
Carduus marianus                    Stovin Wood, Kirkstead.
Centaurea scabiosa                  Horncastle, long hedge.
Chironia pulchella                  Ditto, Blind lane, Scrivelsby
                                    road.
Cichorium intybus                   Revesby.
Cineraria palustris                 Sturton.
Comarum palustre                    West Ashby furze-hill.
Cornus sanguinea                    Horncastle, woodcock-lane.
Convallaria majalis                 Bardney.
Cynoglossum officinali              Martin, Thornton.
Crepis biennis                      Thornton, West Ashby.
Digitalis purpurea                  Holbeck, Salmonby.
Dipsacus sylvestris                 Horncastle.
Drosera longifolia                  Tattershall.
Drosera rolundifolia                Ditto.
Echium vulgare                      West Ashby.
Erica vulgaris                      Moor.
Erysimum alliaria                   Poolham.
Eriophorum angustifolium            Bridle road to Hemingby.
Eupatorium cannabinum               Tetford.
Frugaria vesca                      Somersby.
Galeobdolon luteum.                 Tetford and Stovin Woods.
Genista anglica                     Horncastle.
Gentiana amarella                   Greetham, Hemingby.
Gentiana pneumonanthe               Tattershall Park.
Geum rivale                         Horncastle, wet meadows.
Geum urbanum                        Ditto, banks of the Old Bane.
Galium saxatile                     Moor.
Hedysarum onobrychis                Golceby.
Hottonia palustris                  Thornton Mill.
Hydrocotyle vulgaris                Bridle road to Hemingby.
Hyosciamus nigrum                   Hemingby, Baumber, Roughton.
Hypericum audrosæmum                Tattersall.
Hypericum perfoliatum               Ditto.
Hypericum pulchrum                  Tattershall.
Hypericum elodes                    Bridle road to Hemingby.
Hydrocharis morsus ranæ             Ditto.
Iris pseudacorus                    Bridle road to Hemingby.
Jasione montana                     Horncastle.
Ligustrum vulgare                   Edlington, West Ashby.
Linum perenne                       High Tointon.
Lonicera periclymenum               Holbeck, Roughton.
Lycopsis europæus                   Horncastle.
Lysimachia nemorum                  Roughton.
Lythrum salicaria                   Thornton mill.
Lychnis flos cuculi, var. flor.     West Ashby furze-hill.
alb.
Malaxis paludoso                    Moor.
Melampyrum pratense                 Tetford and Stovin Woods.
Menyanthes trifoliata               Horncastle.
Myrica gali                         Moor.
Ophyris apifera                     Mareham-le-fen.
Ophrys ovato                        Thornton Wood.
Oxalis acetosella                   Tetford Wood.
Ophioglossum                        Langton, Stixwold.
Ononis arvensis                     Horncastle.
Orchis mascula                      Tetford and Thornton Woods.
Orchis maculata                     Ditto.
Orobus tuberosus                    Daw-Wood.
Parietaria officinalis              Horncastle Church, Kirkstead
                                    Abbey.
Paris quadrifolia                   Tetford Wood.
Parnassia palustres                 Horncastle.
Pedicnlaris palustris               Ditto.
Pinguicula vulgaris                 Tattershall.
Polygonum bistorta                  Horncastle.
Poterium sanguisorba                Ditto.
Primula elatior                     Thornton Wood.
Pyrethrum parthenium                Wilksby.
Ranunculus flammula                 Ditto.
Ranunculus lingua                   Woodhall wharf.
Reseda luteola                      Tetford Wood.
Rhamnus catharticus                 Thimbleby.
Rubus idæus                         Wood at Somersby.
Sagittaria sagittifolia             Thornton Mill.
Salvia verbenaca                    Horncastle.
Sanicula europea                    Stovin and Tetford Woods.
Saponaria officinalis               Baumber, West Ashby, Horncastle.
Scandix pecten veneris              Hemingby.
Scilla bifolia                      Thornton Wood.
Scrophularia aquatica               Bridle road to Hemingby.
Serratula tinctoria                 Thornton, Stovin and Tetford
                                    Woods
Solanum dulcamara                   Horncastle, Golceby.
Solidago virga aurea                Tattershall.
Spartium scoparium                  West Ashby, Harrington.
Spirea fillipendula                 Bridle road to Hemingby.
Tamus communis                      West Ashby.
Tanacetum vulgare                   Salmonby, Golceby.
Teucrium scorodonia                 Holbeck, Salmonby.
Tormentilla repens                  Bridle road to Hemingby,
                                    Scrivelsby.
Trachelium majus                    Revesby.
Tussilago farfara                   Horncastle.
Tussilago hybrida                   Horncastle, Hemingby.
Tussilago petasites                 Horncastle.
Typha latifolia                     Tetford.
Vaccinium oxycoccum                 Moor.
Valeriana sylvestris                Horncastle, Tattershall.
Verbascum                           Tetford Wood.
Verbena officinales                 West Ashby.
Vinca major                         Salmonby.
Viola albus                         Edlington.
Viola canina                        Tetford Wood.
Viola hirta                         Ditto.
Viola tricolor                      Holbeck, Salmonby, Tetford.

Minerals occur rarely in this part, and in very small quantities.  Lumps
of sulphuret of iron in the oolite stratum, earthy oxide of iron and
prussiate of iron in a valley at Salmonby, and a stalactitic oxide of
iron in the ferruginous gravel, comprise all the varieties which have yet
been found.

Although organic remains are to be found in some parts of this district
in considerable quantities, yet they do not include many varieties.  The
following list of those now in the collection of the author, comprises
one of almost every species which has yet been found.

                    _From the Chalk Stratum_.  No. 2.

A cast within some bivalve Venus.

A cast within Terebratula semiglobosus.  _Sowerby’s Mineral Conchology_,
15 _and_ 59.

                  _From the Sand Stone Stratum_.  No. 5.

An Ammonites, curious and not named.  It is without a keel; else like
Ammonites inflatus.

A Cardita.  _Sowerby’s Mineral Conchology_, 197.

An Inoceramus.

An Unio.

A Terebratula approaching glaber.

A Terebratula approaching acerminatus.

A cast within a bivalve, not named.

A cast within a Trochus.

                 _From the Shale or Clunch Clay_.  No. 6.

An Os Femoris of some large quadruped.

Part of a large Vertebræ.

Part of a small Vertebræ.

An Ammonites, not named.

A Venus equales.  _Sowerby’s Mineral Conchology_, 21.

An Ostrea crista galli.  _Linnæus_.

A Cardita.

An Unio hybrida.  _Sowerby’s Mineral Conchology_, 154, _fig._ 2.

An Ostrea under valve, with a cast of the inside of the upper valve.

A Griphites incurva.  _Sowerby’s Mineral Conchology_, 112, 1 _and_ 2.

An Ammonites seratus.  _Sowerby’s Mineral Conchology_, 24.

An Inoceramus Cuvierii hinge.

Several Unios.

A piece composed entirely of shells, the chief part of which are the
Serpula auricula.  It also contains an inside cast of a small turretted
shell.

   _From the beds of Ferruginous Gravel in Alluvium of Shale_.  No. 8.

A Madrepore.

An Alcyonium, or Spongites.

An Astarte.

A cast of Shell, not named.

An Echinus.

A cast of an Unio indistinct.

A part of a Spongites.

An Ostrea, with a cast of the upper valve.

An impression of a Cactus, or an Euphorbia, or some other Oriental plant.
_Sowerby’s Mineral Conchology_, 40.

                                * * * * *

In the valley at Salmonby, near to the spot where the earthy oxide of
iron is found, is a chalybeate spring, the water of which is of the same
nature as that of Tunbridge, but much stronger.




APPENDIX


No. 1.


       _Manor and Soke of Horncastle_, _from the Domesday Survey_.

M.  In HORNECASTRE h’b. Edid regin. III car. t’ræ sine g’ldo.  T’ra ad
IIII car.  Ibi Rex h’t II car. in d’nio, et XXIX vill. et XII bord.
h’ntes III car.  Ibi II mol’d. XXVI solid, et c ac. pati.  T.R.E. ual. XX
lib. mº XLIIII lib.

Soca hujus Manerii.

In STIMELBI IIII car. t’re.  Ibi XXII soch. et XVIII uill. h’nt IIII car.
et dimid. et CCXL ac. pati.

In TODINTUNE III car. t’re.  Ibi XXIII soch. et II uill’i et VIII bord.
h’nt IIII car. et CCC acas pati.

In LANGETONE et TORP III car. t’re.  Ibi XIII soch. et XXIIII uill. h’nt
IIII car. et I mol’d. IX solid, et CXX acas pati et CCL acas silve
pastilis.

In FOLESBI dim. car. t’re.  Ibi III soch. h’nt dim. car. et VIII ac’s
pati et CXX acas siluæ past. p. loca.

In CUNINGESBI I car. t’re et dim. jnland.  Ibi VIII uill. et III bord.
cu. I car. et dim. et v piscariæ v solid, et XII ac. pati et LX ac. siluæ
minutæ.

In HOLTHA’ II car. et VI bou. t’re.  Ibi VII soch. h’nt I car. et dim. et
XXXII acas pati et XX acas siluæ pastilis.

In FOLESBI I car. t’re.  Ibi I soch. h’t I car.

In ROCSTUNE XII bou. t’re.  Ibi VIII soch. h’nt I car. et dim. et XV acas
pati et XL acas siluæ past.

In SCRIUELESBI III car. et VIII bou. t’ræ.  Ibi XX soch. et XII bord.
h’nt VI. car. et CC aca pati. et VI acas siluæ minutæ.

In MOREBI III car. t’re.  Ibi VIII soch. et X bord. h’nt IIII car.  Ibi
æccl’a et CCXL ac. pati et VI acas silue min.

In MARUN III car. t’re.  Ibi XXI soch. et XI bord. h’nt IIII car.  Ibi
æccl’a et p’b’r et LX aca pati et CCC acas siluæ min.

In ENDREBI III car. t’re.  Ibi XVI soch. et VI bord. h’nt IIII car. et LX
acas pati et CCCCL ac. siluæ past.

In WILCHESBI I car. t’re et dim.  Ibi IIII soch. et V bord. h’nt I car.
et XX acas siluæ minutæ.

In ASCHEBI VI car. t’re.  Ibi XLV soch. et V mil. et XIII bord. h’nt VIII
car. et qingentæ aca pati et pasture.

In TEDLINTUNE IIII car. t’re.  Ibi XXI soch. et VIII uill. et III bord.
h’nt VIII car. et CCCC ac. pati.

Int’ totu’ ad g’ld. XLII carucate t’re. T.

T’ra ad LVIII carucas.

In his sunt CCXII soch. et LXVI uill. et LXX bord. h’ntes LV carucas.

                                                              _Folio_ 339.



No. 2.


_Exemplification of several Grants to the Bishop of Carlisle respecting
the Manor of Horncastle_.

CAROLUS SECUNDUS Dei gratia Angliæ, Scotiæ, Franc’, et Hiberniæ Rex,
Fidei Defensor, &c. omnibus ad quos p’sentes l’re p’venerint Sal’tem.
INSPEXIMUS irrotulament’ chartæ confirmac’on’ quam D’nus Henricus quondam
Rex Angliæ tertius, progenitor noster, fecit Walto Carliol. Episcopo, in
rotul. claus. de anno quarto decimo ejusd’m nup.  Regis irrotulat. ac
inter recordia canc’ n’re infra Turrem n’ram London’ residen’, in hæc
verba: Rex concessit p’ chartam suam Walt’o Carliol.  Episcopo q’d ipse
et heredes sui habeant imp’petuum p’ omnes terras et tenement’ sua in
manerio et soka de Horncastle cum pertinen’ quasdam lib’tates et
quietancias sicut plenius in p’dict’ charta continetur.  Et mandatum est
Vicecomiti Lincoln. qd p’dictam chartam in pleno comitatu suo legi, et
concessas à Rege eidem Episcopo lib’tates et quietancias ei et heredibus
suis firmiter fac’t observari.  T. R. apud Portsmouth vicessimo sexto die
Aprilis.  INSPEXIMUS etiam irrotulament’ quorundam seperal’ brevium
ejusd’m D’ni Henrici quondam Regis Angliæ tertii, progenitoris n’ri,
adtunc Vic. suo Lincoln. direct’, gerent’ dat. vicessimo die Aprilis anno
p’dict’ in rotul. claus. de anno supradict’ ejusd’m nup.  Regis
irrotulat. ac ibid’m de recordo residen’, in hæc verba: Rex Vicecomiti
Lincoln. Sal’tem.  Scias qd p’ cartam n’ram concessimus venerabili patri
Walt’o Carliol.  Episcopo qd ipse et heredes sui habeant imp’petuum unam
feriam apud maner’ suum de Horncastle singulis annis, que incipiat in
Vigilia Sancti Barnabæ Apostoli, et duret p’ octo dies sequen. preter
feriam illam qu’ habent in eod’m manerio singulis annis ad festum Sancti
Laurentii, nisi p’dict’ feria sit ad nocumentum vicinar’ feriar’; et ideo
tibi p’cipimus qd p’dict’ feriam clamari fac’ et teneri sicut p’dictum.
Teste meipso apud Portsmouth vicessimo die Aprilis anno re’ni n’ri quarto
decimo.  Rex eid’m Vic. Sal’tem.  Scias qd p’ chartam n’ram concessimus
venerabili patri Walt’o Carliol. Episcopo qd ipse et heredes sui habeant
imp’petuum liberam warrenam in manerio suo et soka de Horncastle; et ideo
tibi p’cipimus qd s’c’d’m tenorem p’dict’ chartæ n’ræ warrenam p’dictam
clamari facias et teneri sicut p’dict’.  Test. ut supra.  INSPEXIMUS
etiam irrotulament’ cujusdam al’ chartæ confirmac’on’ ejusd’m D’ni
Henrici quondam Regis Angliæ tertii, eid’m Episcopo Carliol. quondam
fact’, in rotul. claus. de anno quinto decimo ejusd’m nuper Regis
irrotulat’, ac ib’d’m de recordo residen’, in hæc verba: Rex p’ chartam
suam conessit Walt’o Carliol. Episcopo quod ipse et heredes sui et omnes
homines eor’ in manerio et soka de Horncastle cum pertinentiis suis
h’eant imp’petuum lib’tates et quietancias in p’dict’ charta Regis sic
inde conferta contentas.  Et mandat’ est Vicecom. Lincoln. qd p’dict’
chartam in pleno comitatu suo legi faciat, et concessas eis p’dictas
lib’tates et quietancias in balliva sua firmiter eis faciat observari.
Teste R. apud Walingford sexto die Januarii.  Et mandat’ est Baron’ de
Scaccario qd lib’tates illas et quietancias irrotulari fac’ et observari.
Teste ut supra.  INSPEXIMUS ulterius irrotulament’ cujusdam al’ chartæ
ejusd’m quondam Regis Henrici tertii, eid’m Episcopo Carleol. quondam
fact’, in rotulo claus. de anno quinto decimo ejusd’m Regis irrotulat’,
ac ib’d’m in recordo residen’, in hæc verba: Rex concessit Carleol.
Episcopo qd ipse et heredes sui habeant imp’petuum singulis annis unum
mercatum p’ diem Mercurii apud manerium suum de Horncastle, et qd habeant
imp’petuum unam feriam singulis annis, ib’d’m singulis annis duraturam p’
septem dies, vizt in Vigilia et in die et in crastino S’cti Laurentii et
p’ quatuor dies sequen’, nisi, &c.  Et mandatu’ est Vicecom.  Lincoln. qd
p’dict’ mercatum et p’dictam feriam clamari faciat et teneri sicut
p’dict’ est.  Teste Rege apud Westmr decimo octavo die Octobris.
INSPEXIMUS ulterius irrotulament’ cujusdam inquisic’onis captæ coram D’no
Will’o de S’cto Omero et Warino de Chaucambe Justiciar’ D’ni Ed’r’i
quondam Regis Angliæ primi, anno regni sui tertio, in rotul. wapentag.
ejusd’m nup.  Regis Ed’r’i primi irrotulat’, ac ib’d’m de recordo
residen’, in hæc verba: Hæc est Inquisitio facta apud Lincoln, coram D’no
Will’o de S’cto Omero et Warino de Chaucumbe, Justiciar’ D’ni Regis
assignat’ ad inquirend’ sup’ articulis subscriptis p’ duodecim juratores
de wapentag’ de Horncastle, vizt p’ D’num Rob’tum de Polum jur’, Simon
Camerar’ de Edlington, Ric’um de Woodall, Petrum de Danderby, Will’um de
Wispington, Henricum fil. Andreæ de ead’m, Sim. juxta Aquam de
Baterfield.  Qui dicunt p’ sacramentum suum, quod cum ab eis inquirit’
que et quot &c. maneria D’nus Rex habet in manu sua in singulis comitat’
tam &c. dicunt qd nihil sciunt.  Capit que etiam maneria esse solent in
manibus Regis predecessoris D’ni Regis &c. dicunt qd D’m’nus H. avus D’ni
Regis H. patris D’ni Regis qui nunc est, habuit quoddam manerium de
Horncastle in manu sua, et feoffavit Gerbaldum de Estald quondam militem
de Flaunder’ pro servicio suo, scilicet p’ servicium feod’ unius militis
D’no Regi faciend.  Et post obitum d’cti Gervaldi descendit dictum
manerium in Gerrardo de Rodes, nepoti suo et heredi.  Et post decessum
d’cti Gerrardi de Rodes, descendit Rad. de Rodes, filio suo et heredi,
qui etiam longo tempore tenuit de D’no Rege H. patre Regis Ed’r’i qui
nunc est, dictum manerium p’ servicium militar’ feod. unius militis, et
vendidit d’ctum maner’ Walterio Mauclerke quondam Episcopo Carliol’ et
successoribus suis ex concessione et confirmac’one D’ni Regis H. patris
D’ni Regis Ed’r’i qui nunc est.  Et D’nus Rob’tus Carleol’ Episcopus
tenet nunc d’ctum manerium tanquam Ecclesiæ suæ Carleol. p’tinen’.
Dicunt etiam qd Gerrard de Rodes, filius p’d’ Rad. est modius int’ D’num
Regem et d’ctum Episcopum, et defendit d’ctum manerium versus D’num Regem
p’ servicium feod’ unius militis, unde Soka de Horncastle cum p’tinen
valet p’ ann’ x libras except. ecclesiis d’cto manerio p’tinen.  Cap.
simili modo inquirat de firmis, Thrything et Wapent. Civitat’ Burgor’ &c.
dicunt qd Subthrything p’solvit D’no Regi p’ ann’ c mure’.  Dicunt iterum
qd Wapentag. de Horncastle et Gayretree valent p’ ann’ ad opus D’ni Regis
XIIII marc’.  De ceteris autem Wapentagiis nihil dicunt.  Capit qui alii
à Rege clamant habere returnam vel extract’ brevium &c. dicunt qd D’nus
Episcopus Carleol. habet extractas et return’ brevium, et qd tenet
placitum de vetito nameo; habet etiam assis’ panis et cervis. furcas et
waif infra Sokam de Hornc’, sed à quo tempore et quo warranto qualit’
dicunt qd nesciunt.  INSPEXIMUS ulterius irrotulament’ cujusdam al.
chartæ confirmac’onis quam D’nus Henricus quondam Rex Angliæ sextus,
progenitor n’er, fecit Deo et Ecclesiæ Beatæ Mariæ Carleol. et venerabili
patri Waltero quondam Carleol. Episcopo et successorib’s suis et Priori
et Canonicis Carleol. in ead’m ecclesia Deo servien. et eor’
successorib’s, in rotul. chart’ de anno vicessimo quinto ejusd’m nup’
Regis Henrici sexti irrotulat’ ac ibid’m de recordo residen’, in hæc
verba: Rex universis et singulis Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, &c. Sal’tem.
Inspeximus chartam D’ni Hen. quondam Regis Angliæ tertii post Conquestum,
progenitoris n’ri, factam in hæc verba: Henricus Dei gratia Rex Angliæ et
Franciæ et D’nus Hib’niæ, Dux Normand’ et Acquitann’, Comes Ande’,
Arch’ep’is, Episcopis, Abatib’s, Priorib’s, Comitib’s, Baronib’s,
Justiciariis, Vicecomitib’s, Preposit’, Ministris, et omnib’s Ballivis
fidelib’s suis, Sal’tem.  Sciatis nos intuitu Dei, et pro salute animæ
n’ræ et animarum antecessor’ et heredum nostror’, concessisse et prsenti
charta n’ra confirmasse Deo et Ecclesiæ Beatæ Mariæ Carliol’, et
venerabili patri Waltero Carliol’ Episcopo et successorib’s suis, et
Priori et Canonicis Carliol’ in ead’m ecclesia Deo servientib’s, et eor’
successorib’s, omnes terras et redditus, tenem’t’ et possessions, jura et
dignitat’, lib’tates et lib’ras consuetudines, quæ eis à nobis vel
antecessorib’s n’ris vel aliquib’s aliis collatæ sunt vel conferend.
sicut chartæ donator’ rationabilit’ testantur vel testabunt’.
Concessimus etiam eid’m Episcopo et successorib’s suis, quod ipsi et
Prior et Canonici Carleol’ et eor’ successores imperpetuum habeant p’
omnes terras suas et tenement’ sua theol. thenc et infangenthef et
utfangenthef; et qd ipsi et omnes homines eor’ sunt quieti imp’petuum
erga nos et heredes n’ros, Vicecomites, Constabular’, Prepositos, et
omnes Ballivos n’ros, de theolonio; et qd ipsi et omnes homines eor’ et
omnes homines feod’ suis sunt quieti imperpetuu’ erga nos et heredes
n’ros, Vicecomites, Constabular’ Preposit’, et omnes Ballivos n’ros, de
passagio, pontagio, lastagio, stallagio, et de conductu thesauri, et de
operac’onib’s castellor’, domor’, muror’, fossator’, pontium, calcetor’,
vivarior’, stagnor’, et clausur’ parcor’, et de omnibus aliis
operac’onib’s, et de sectis shirar’, wapentaccor’, hundr’or’, et
frethingor’ et de auxiliis Vicecomitum, et de murdro, et de franc’ pleg’
et de vis. frankpleg’, et de misericordiis et de finib’s pro
misericordiis, et p’ transgressionib’s, et p’ licencia concordandi, et de
escapiis latron’, et de bobus seizina, et de placitis, querelis, et
omnib’s exacc’onib’s ad nos, Vicecomites, Constabularios, vel aliquos
alios Ballivos n’ros pertinentib’s.  Concessimus etiam eid’m E’po et
successorib’s suis qd nullus Vicecomes, Constabular’, vel alius Ballivus
n’er ingressum vel posse habent in predict’ terris, feodis, vel
hominib’s, sed totum ad prdict’ Ep’c’um et successores suos et eor’
Ballivos p’tineat, preter attachiament’ de placito coronæ, ad quæ quidem
cum Coronatores venerint faciend’ ea ita fac’ qd in nullo lædatr lib’tas
p’dicti Episcopi vel successor’ suor’.  Omnes autem prdict’ lib’tates
concessimus ita qd prdict’ Prior et Canonici Carliol. et omnes
successores sui subsint et respond’ et satisfaciant prdict’ E’po et
omnib’s successor’ suis, et nulli alii nisi de voluntate ejusd’m Episcopi
et successor’ suor’, de omnib’s prdictis, sicut nobis aut heredib’s
n’ris, aut Vic’ aut Constabulariis vel aliis Ballivis n’ris, subessent et
responderent et satisfacient de eisd’m si ad nos ilia pertinerint.
Concessimus etiam qd id’m Episcopus et successores sui distringere
possint prdictos Priorem et Canonicos Carleol. terras et feoda et homines
de terris et feodis illorum, et omnes homines de terris et aliis feodis
ipsius Episcop: et successor’ suor’, ad omnia prdicta, sicut nos ad ead’m
eos distringere possumus aut heredes n’ri, aut Vic’ aut Constabular’ vel
aliqui alii Ballivi n’ri si prdict’ lib’tates aut quietanc’ concesse non
fuissent.  Concessimus etiam prdiot’ Ep’o qd si aliquas lib’tates aut
quietancias ex hiis que continentr in charta ista concessit Priori et
Canonicis Carliol. nos eas confirmabimus.  Concessimus etiam eid’m
Epis’po et successorib’s suis, et Priori et Canonic’ Carliol. et eor’
successorib’s, quod omnes homines eor’ sint liberi et quieti imperpetuum
de omnib’s juratis et assis. et recognic’onib’s faciend. preterquam in
attingend. p’priis dominicis n’ris p’ juratam si opus fu’it infra com’
ubi manentes fuerint, si forte contenc’o int’ nos ipsos et alios oriat’,
ita qd occ’one talis jurat. si forte evenerit p’ Vic’ vel alios Ballivos
n’ros non occasionentur nec lib’tas prdicti Episcopi vel successor’ suor’
in aliqua lædatr.  Concessimus etiam eid’m Episcopo et successorib’s suis
quod si aliquis hominum de terris vel feodis suis sive de terris vel
feodis Prioris et Canonicor’ Carleol. p’ delicto suo vitam aut membrum
debeat amittere, vel fugit et judicio stare noluit, vel aliud delictum
fecit pro quo cattalla sua perdere debeat, ubicunq’ justic’ fieri debeat,
sive in cur’ n’ra sive in alia cur’, omnia cattalla illa sint prdicti
Episcopi et successor’ suor’, et liceat eis sine disturbac’one
Vicecomitum et quorumcunq’ Ballivorum n’ror’ et alior’ ponere se in
seisinam de prdictis cattallis in prdictis casibus et aliis quando
Ballivi nr’i, si ad nos pertinerent, cattalla illa in manum n’ram ea
seisiri possent et deberent.  Concessimus etiam eid’m Episcopo et
successoribus suis, quod quotiescunq’ aliqui malefactores capt. fuerint
in prdictis terris vel feodis p’ Ballivos ejusd’m E’pi et successor’
suor’, de quibus non possit vel non debeat fieri judicium in cur’ prdicti
E’pi vel successor’ suor’, Vicecomites et Ballivi n’ri recipiant prdictos
malefactores sine difficultate et dilac’one sup’ forisfacturam n’ram,
quandocunq’ Ballivi prdicti E’pi et successor’ suor’ dictos malefactores
prdictis Ballivis n’ris liberare voluerint.  Concessimus etiam eid’m E’po
et successorib’s suis qd habeant imperpetuum omnia amerciamenta de
omnibus hominib’s de terris et feodis suis, et de Priore et Canonicis
Carleol. et eor’ successoribus, et de omnib’s hominib’s de terris et
feodis omnib’s eorund’m, quæ amerciamenta ad nos vel heredes n’ros, vel
Vic’ aut Constabular’ vel aliquos alios Ballivos n’ros, possent
pertinere, si ipsa amerciamenta prdictis E’po et successorib’s suis
concessa non fuissent; et qd id’m Ep’us et successores sui habeant
potestatem ad distringend. omnes prdictos ad amerciamenta eis reddend.:
prohiben. insuper sup’ forisfacturam n’ram decem librar’ ne quis de
prdict’ amerciament’ colligend. vel recipiend. sine districtione inde
faciend. nisi p’ voluntatem ejusd’m E’pi aut successor’ suor’ se
intromittat.  Concessimus etiam eid’m E’po et successorib’s suis, quod
habeant in o’ib’s prdictis terris ten. et feod. omnia illa quæ vocant’
waif.  Concessimus etiam eid’m E’po et successorib’s suis et eisd’m
Priori et Canonicis et eor’ successorib’s omnes prdict’ lib’tates sicut
prdict’ est tam in terr’ ten. feod. et hominib’s adquirend. quam
adquisit.  Concessimus insuper eid’m E’po et successorib’s suis quod
licet aliquam lib’tatem p’ nos ipsis concess. processu temporis quocunq’
casu contingen. usi non fuerint, nihilominus tamen postea utantur
lib’tate ead’m sine aliqua contradicc’one, non obstant’ eo qd aliquo casu
ea usi non fuerint.  Omnes autem prdict’ lib’tates et quietancias
concessimus p’ nobis et heredib’s n’ris p’fat.  E’po et successorib’s
suis in liberam puram et p’petuam eleemosynam.  Quare volumus et firmiter
p’cipimus qd prdict’ E’pus et successores sui, et prdict’ Prior et
Canonici Carleol. et successores sui, et omnes ho’i’es eor’ et terr’ et
feod’ et omnes homines de feod. illis, habeant prdictas lib’tates et
quietancias, fin. et amerciament’, bene et in pace, integre et plenar’,
in o’ib’s rebus et locis imperpetuum, sicut prdictum est.  Hiis testibus:
H. Lincoln.  J. Bathon.  Th. Norwic’ E’pis, Hub. de Burgo comit. Lanc.
justic’ Angl’, Godefro de Craucumbe, Ph’o de Albinas, Hugone
Dispensatore, Raun’ Britone, Waltero de Kirkham, Alex’o de Swerford
archerd. Salop’, Henr’ de Capella, Ric’o fil. Hug’, et al.  Dat. p’ man.
R. Cicestr’ E’pi, cancellar’ n’ri, apud Oxon. sexto decimo die Julii anno
regni n’ri quinto decimo.  Nos autem concession’ prdict’ ratas h’entes et
gratas, easq. p’ nobis et heredib’s n’ris quantum in nobis est acceptam’,
approbamus, et ratificamus, ac venerabili in Christo patri M. nunc E’po
Carliol. et Priori et Canonicis Eccl’iæ prdictæ et successor’ suis
prdictis concedimus et confirmamus sicut charta prdict’ rationabiliter
testatur, et p’ut iidem E’pus, Prior, et Canonici eis uti debent, ipsiq’
et p’decessores sui prdict’ lib’tatib’s, franc’es’, et quietanciis illis
à tempore confectionis chartæ prdict’ hactenus rationabiliter uti et
gaudere consueverint.  Et ulterius de uberiori gratia n’ra concessimus
eid’m E’po, Priori et Canonicis Eccl’iæ prdictæ, qd ipsi habeant à primo
die Aprilis ultimi preterit’ sibi et successorib’s suis imperpetuum
cattalla felon. et fugitivor’, fellon. de se, dampnator’ et utlagator’,
ex quacunq’ causa et p’ quamcunq’ causam, omnium hominum tenentiu’ suor’,
residentiu’ et non residentiu’, de et in terris et feodis prdictor’ E’pi,
Prioris et Canonicor’, ubicunq’ cattalla illa sint vel fuerint inventa,
sive infra regnum n’rum Angliæ seu alibi infra regiam potestatem n’ram;
et licebit prfato E’po, Priori et Canonicis, et successorib’s suis, et
eor’ ministris, ponere se in seisinam dictor’ catallor’ sic à dicto primo
die Aprilis forisfact’ et ex nunc forisfaciend’, et ead’m catalla ad opus
dictor’ E’pi, Prioris et Canonic’, et successor’ suor’, habere et tenere
sine occasione vel impedimento n’ri vel heredum n’ror’, Vic’, Escaetor’,
aut alior’ Ballivor’ Ministror’ n’ror’ ac heredum n’ror’ quorumcunq’.
His testibus: Venerabilib’s patrib’s, J. Archie’po Cantuar’ totius Angliæ
Primat’, cancellario n’ro, et J. Archie’po Ebor. Angliæ Primat’; W. Sarum
et A. Cicestriæ custod. privati sigilli n’ri, Ep’is; charissimis
consanguineis n’ris Ric’o Ebor’, Joh’e Exon’, et Humfrido Buck’, Ducib’s;
Edmundo Dors’ et Will’o Suff’i camerar’ n’ro Angliæ, Marchionib’s; Ric’o
Sar’ et Henr’ Northombr’ Comitib’s; Joh’e Vicecomit’ Beamont’, Rad’o
Bottiller D’no Sudley, senescallo hospitii n’ri, et Jacobo Fenes D’no de
Say, camerario hospitii n’ri, Militib’s, et aliis.  Dat’ p’ manum n’ram
apud Westmr vicessimo tertio die Maii, et p’ bre’de privat. sigillo, et
de dat. &c. et p’ dimid. marca solut’ in hanaperio.  Nos autem seperal’
tenor’ omnium et singulor’ prmissor’ ad requisitionem dilecti subditi
n’ri Thomæ Freestone armigeri duximus exemplificand. p’ p’sentes.  In
cujus rei testimonium has l’ras n’ras fieri fecimus patentes.  Teste
meipso apud Westm’ vicessimo sexto die Februarii anno regni n’ri sexto
decimo.

                                                             GRIMSTON, Th.

                                * * * * *

    _From a Newspaper called_ “_The Newes_,” _May_ 26, 1664.  No. 42.

                              Advertisement.

    “This is to notify that the Charter of Horncastle in the County of
    Lincoln is lately exemplified; and that the first fair for horses
    begins seven days before the 11th of June, which is the head fair
    day; and the second horse fair begins 8 days before the 10th of
    August, being the second head fair day: therefore all persons
    concerned may take notice of the same, and that the Toll Books will
    be opened to make Entries accordingly.”

           (This Advertisement is repeated in Nos. 44 and 46.)



No. 3.


_The Division of Wildmore Fen_, _between the Baronies of Bolingbroke_,
_Horncastle_, _and Scrivelsby_.  _From the Fenman’s Vade Mecum_.

THE Abbot and Covent of Kirkstead have right and Lordship in the Maris
which is called Wildmore, as by their antient and manifest instruments in
writeing doth appeare.  And for that their right and l’b’tie may more
planly be known unto the world, it behoveth that the declaring thereof by
antient times and dayes be more manifested and opened.  Be it therefore
knowne, that the said Marris Ground called Wildmore is p’tinent and
belonging to three Barronnies, that is to say, Bullingbrooke, Horncastle,
and Scrivelsbie: the said whole Marris Ground in antient time was called
Wildmore, that is to say, in the time of Stephen, late or sometime King
of England; and in the fourth yeare of his raigne was founded the Abby of
Kirkstead, by the progeintors and fowndors of Tattershall; and in the
eight yeare of the raigne of the said King Stephen was founded the Abbey
of Reavesby, by William Romar, Earl of Lincoln, which William did give
the house of Kerxe com’on of pasture in Wildmore, as much as to him and
to the lands he had did appertaine; these things being ended and finished
before the great and generall battells and warres, the said King Stephen
died, after whome succeeded King Henry, who when he retayned in his owne
hands two of the said Barronies, that is to say, Scrivelsby and
Horncastle, he did give unto the said house of Kerxe, the Hermitage of
Wildmore, with a certaine pasture thereunto belonging.  And in pr’cesse
of time the said King did give the Barronary of Horncastle unto Gerbald
Skalde, of Flandrs, and the Barronary of Scrivelsby unto Robte Marmyon, a
Norman: theise two Barrons did after give unto the said house of Kirks by
their writings com’on of pasture in Wildmore, on condition they should
suffer no man to com’on with them in the said Wildmore, but only
themselves and theire tennants.  Will’m of Romar Earl of Lincoln after
being dead, the gift which he made unto the said house of Kirks, Will’m
of Romar, his nephew and his heir, did by his writeing confirme his said
uncle’s gift unto the said howse.  And after him, Ralfe Earle of Chester
did likewise confirme by his deed of gifte.  At length contenc’on fell
amongst the said Barrons for the said Wildmore, for that none of them did
know what or how much did appertaine of the said Wildmore to every of
their Barronaries, wheruppon division was made between the Barron of
Bullingbrooke and the Barron of Horncastle and Scrivelsbie, in the said
Marris; that the men of the Barronry of Bullingbrooke might quietly
com’on in their owne feudal com’ons, and the men of Horncastle and
Scrivelsby in theire p’ts, which said division was made in the time of
the said Will’m Romar the elder, in this manner.  It is ordained betwene
the Sookes and the assent of their Lords and their tennants, that eight
of the most wisest, discreetest, and antientest of the same Sookes,
should walk and view the same Marris, and make division thereof amongst
the said Sookes, which said eight men were chosen by the assent of the
said Sookes.  That is to say, four in the soke of Horncastle and
Scrivelsby, that is to say, Goodricke of Cunningsby, grave of Wildmore
for the space of forty yeares, Brodericke the father of Algar, Gericke,
an ould and reverend man, Recell son of Utenker; and foure of the Sooke
of Bullingbrooke, Walter of Keale, Henry of East Kirkby, Gunford of
Smerhurne, and Hiver of Miningsby.  These eight men set downe the stones
and markes in forme as followeth, that is to say, beginning at Fillward
mere, distant a little from mere end, and there setting up a redd marke,
proceeded directly behind Newham, waveing the same on the left hand, from
thence unto Ellmere pitt, and All garr more, and soe directly unto Maple
buske under Sherwood.  And whatsoever was in the East part app’teined
unto the Soake of Bollingbrooke, and whatsoever was in the West part
apperteined unto Horncastle and Scrivelsby.  All theise were renewed in
the time of Ralfe Earle of Chester.  Terebald of Scalde aforesaid, being
dead, succeeded him as Barron of Horncastle.  After which succeeded Gered
of Rhodes, a worthy and valiant knight; after him succeeded Ralfe of
Rhodes, Lord of Horncastle, who, contrary to the grants of his ancestors,
did bring in the said Wildmore other mens cattell, whereup’n a plea of
covent was sued against the said Ralfe of Rhodes, by the Abbot and Covent
of Kirkstead, in the court of our souvraigne Lord the King, and a fyne
knowledged by the said Ralfe of Rhodes, wherein was contayned, that the
said Ralfe did give for him and his heires unto the said Abbot and Covent
of Kirkstead all his right and l’b’tie which he claimed to have, or might
have by any manner of meanes in Wildmore.  That is to say, in meadowes,
pastures, and feedings, and in all other man’er of proffitts, easmts,
lib’ties, customes, and in all other things, without reteining of any
thing, saveing and reserving to himselfe and his heires, and his men,
pasture in Wildmore, and turbary to be had and taken to their only use
and uses, and not to be given or sold to any others.  The same Ralfe hath
alsoe given unto the said howse of Kirkstead all his lordship and right
in Wildmore, as appeareth by his graunt.  Furthermore, Robt Marmyon, Lord
of Scrivelsby, being dead, succeeded after him Robte, his sonne.  This
Robte, after the death of his father, likewise contrary to the graunt of
his ancestors, did bring into the said Com’on of Wildmore other mens
cattell, whereupon the like plea of covent was sued against the said
Robte, whereunto he did appeare, and did knowledge aff’yne to the said
Abbot and Covent in the same court, the same conteining in effect the
same words before menc’oned: from which time until this p’sent, whereby
the said Abbotts and Covents of Kirkstead, in impoundmts, and all other
lib’ties and customes, have bene Lords of Wildmore, and peaceably and
quietly have enjoyed the same as true Lords thereof, without impedimte of
any man.

                                                  _Harleian MS. No._ 4127.



No. 4.


                        _Horncastle Free School_.

    Tertia Pars Paten’ de anno regni Regine Elizabethe tertio decimo.

P’ Gub’natorib’s libe’ Scole de Horne Castell de con’ sibi et
successorib’s.

REGINA om’ib’s ad quos &c. Sal’tem.  CUM prdil’c’us et fidelis
consiliarius ac subditus n’r Edwardus Fynes, prnobilis ordinis Gartrij
Miles, D’us Clynton et Saye, ac Magnus Admirallus n’r Anglie, nob’
humilit’ supplicav’it ut in villa de Hornecastell in com’ n’ro Lincoln’
unam scolam gram’aticalem ad bonam educac’o’em et instrucc’o’em pueror’
et juvenu’ ibidem et circa partes vicinas h’itanciu’ et com’oranciu’ in
cognic’o’e bonar’ l’rar’ erigi, fundari, et stabiliri dignaremr: SCIATIS
q’d nos huic pie petic’o’i libent’ annuentes, ex gra’ n’ra sp’iali, c’ta
sciencia et mero motu n’ris, volums, concedims, et ordinams p’ nob’
hered’s et successorib’s n’ris, q’d de cetro sit et erit una Scola
grammaticalis in villa de Horncastell prd’c’a, que vocabitr Lib’a Scola
Grammaticalis Regine Elizabeth’ in villa sive soca de Hornecastell in
com’ Lincoln’ ex fundac’o’e Edwardi D’ni Clynton et Saye p’ educac’o’e
instituc’o’e et instrucc’o’e pueror’ et juvenu’ in gram’atica p’petuo
tempore duratur’; ac scolam illam de uno Mag’ro seu Pedagogo et uno
Subpedagogo sive Hipodidasculo p’ p’petuo continuatur’ erigims, ordinams,
creams, fundams, et stabilims p’ presentes.  ET ut intencio n’ra prd’c’a
meliorem capiat eff’c’m, ac ut trre, ten’, redditus, revrc’o’es, ac alia
hereditamenta ad sustentac’o’em scole prdc’e concedend. assignand. et
appunctuand. melius gub’nentr p’ continuac’o’e ejusdem scole, volums et
ordinams q’d de cetro imp’p’m sint et erunt decem discreti et p’bi
ho’i’es qui vocabuntr Gub’natores possessionu’, revenc’onu’,
hereditamentor’, et bonor’ prd’c’e scole, vulgarit’ vocat’ et vocand’
Lib’a Scola Grammaticalis Regine Elizabeth’ in villa sive soca de
Hornecastell in com’ Lincoln’ ex fundac’o’e Edwardi D’ni Clynton et Saye.
ET ideo SCIATIS q’d nos elegims, no’i’avims et constituims ac p’ p’sentes
eligims no’i’ams assignam’ et constituims dilc’os nob’ Clementem Monke
cl’icum, Joh’em Smith cl’icum, Joh’em Zacheverell genrosum, Thomam Litlor
genrosum, Georgiu’ Hartgrave genrosum, Thomam Raithbecke yoman’, Joh’em
Neale yoman’, Thomam Hamerton yoman’, Will’m Warde yoman’, et Will’m
Harrison yoman’, fore et esse primos et modernos Custodes et Gub’natores
possessionu’ hereditamentor’ et bonor’ d’c’e lib’e Scole vulgarit’ vocat’
et vocand’ ibidem Lib’a Schola Gra’maticalis Regine Elizabeth’ in villa
sive soca de Hornecastell in com’ Lincoln’ ex fundac’o’e ejusdem Edwardi
D’ni Clynton et Saye, ad idem officiu’ bene et fidelit’ exrcend. et
occupand. à dat. prsenciu’ duran’ vit’ eor’ et eor’ diucius viven’.  Et
q’d ijdem Gub’natores in re f’c’o et no’i’e de cetrro sint et erunt unu’
corpus corporat’ et politiquu’ de se imp’p’m p’ nomen Gub’nator’
possessionu’ revenc’onu’ et bonor’ lib’e Scole gram’aticalis Regine
Elizabeth’ in villa sive soca de Hornecastell ex fundac’o’e Edwardi D’ni
Clynton et Saye incorporat’ et erect’; ac ip’os Gub’natores possessionu’,
revenc’onu’, et bonor’ lib’e Scole gram’aticalis Regine Elizabeth’ in
villa sive soca de Horncastell in com. Lincoln, ex fundac’o’e Edwardi
D’ni Clynton et Saye, p’ prsentes incorporams, ac corpus corporatum et
politicum p’ idem nomen duratur’ realit’ et ad plenu’ creams, erigims,
ordinams, facims, et constituims p’ prsentes.  ET volums ac p’ p’sentes
ordinam’ et concedim’ q’d ijdem Gub’natores trar’, possessionu’,
revencionu’, et bonor’ libe’ Scole Gram’atical’ Regine Elizabeth’ in
villa sive soca de Hornecastell in com’ Lincoln’ h’eant successionem
p’petuam, ac p’ idem nomen sint et erunt parsone habiles et in lege
capaces ad p’quirend. recipiend. capiend. et possidend. d’nia, maner’,
trras, ten’, redditus, revenc’o’es, decimas, possessiones, revrc’o’es et
hereditament’ quecumq’, cujuscumq’ sint genris, nature, seu spe’i, sibi
et successorib’s suis in feod’ et p’petuitate, necnon ad dand. concedend.
dimittend. et assignand. easdem trras, ten’, hereditamenta, ac om’ia et
singula alia fact’ et res faciend. et exequend’ p’ nomen prd’c’m.  Et q’d
p’ nomen Gub’nator’ possessionu’, revencionu’, et bonor’ libe’ Scole
gra’maticalis Regine Elizabeth’ in villa sive soca de Hornecastell in
com’ Lincoln’ ex fundac’o’e Edwardi D’ni Clynton et Saye, pl’itare et
impl’itari, respondere et responderi, defendere et defendi valeant et
possint in quibuscumq’ cur’, placeis, et locis, ac coram quibuscumq’
judicib’s et justiciar’ ac alijs p’sonis et officiar’ n’ris vel aliquor’
alior’ quor’cumq’, in om’ib’s et singulis accio’ib’s, sectis, querelis,
causis, matriis, et demand. quibuscumq’, cujuscumq’ sint gen’is, nature,
seu sp’iei, eisdem modo et forma p’ut alii ligei n’ri hujus regni n’ri
Anglie parsone habiles et in lege capaces pl’itare et impl’itari,
respondere et responderi, defendere et defendi, ac h’ere, p’quirere,
recip’e, possidere, dare, concedere, et dimittere valeant et possint.  Et
q’d p’d’c’i Gub’natores et successores sui de cet’o imp’p’m h’eant co’e
Sigillum p’ causis et negocijs suis quibuscumq’ ac successor’ suor’
agend. s’vitur’.  ET ultrius concedims, ordinams, et decrevim’ p’
p’sentes q’d quandocunq’ contigrit aliquem vel aliquos d’c’or’ decern
Gub’nator’ p’ tempore existen’ mori, q’d tunc et tociens bene liceat et
licebit alijs dict’ Gub’natorib’s sup’vivent’ vel majori parti eor’dem
adtunc infra d’c’am villam sive socam de Hornecastell com’oran’ et
inh’itan’, aliam idoneam p’sonam vel alias idoneas p’sonas in locum vel
locos sic morien’ vel morien’ in d’c’o officio Gub’nator’ successur’
elig’e et no’i’are.  Et hoc totiens casus sic accident.  ET ult’ius de
ub’iori gr’a n’ra ac ex c’ta sciencia et mero motu n’ris dedim’ et
concedim’, ac p’ p’sentes p’ nob’ hered. et successorib’s n’ris dam’ et
concedim’, p’fatis modernis Gub’natorib’s et successorib’s suis ac majori
parti eor’dem, plenam potestatem et auctoritatem no’i’andi et
appunctuandi Pedagogum et Subpedagogum Scole p’d’c’e tociens quociens
eadem Scola de Pedagogo vel Subpedagogo vacua fu’it.  Et q’d ip’i
Gub’natores p’ tempore existen’ de tempore in tempus faciant et fac’e
valeant et possint idonea et salubr’ Statuta et Ordinac’o’es in scriptis
conc’nen’ et tangen’ p’servac’o’em et disposic’o’em reddit’ et revenc’ ad
sustentac’o’em ejusdem Scole appunctuand. tangen’ et conc’nen’.  Que
quidem Statuta et Ordinac’o’es sic fiend, volum’, concedim’, et p’
p’sentes p’cipim’ inviolabilit’ observari de tempore in tempus imp’p’m.
ET ult’ius SCIATIS q’d nos in considerac’o’e q’d d’c’i Gub’natores d’c’e
lib’e Scole grammaticalis Regine Elizabeth’ in villa sive soca de
Hornecastell in com’ Lincoln’ ex fundac’o’e p’d’c’i Edwardi D’ni Clynton
et Saye et successores sui on’a ejusdem Scole ac Pedagogi et Subpedagogi
inde de tempore in tempus melius sustineant et supportent, de gr’a n’ra
sp’ali ac ex c’ta sciencia et mero motu n’ris dedim’ et concessim’ ac p’
p’sentes dam’ et concedim’ p’fatis modernis Gub’natorib’s possessionu’
revenc’onu’ et bonor’ d’c’e lib’e Scole Gra’maticalis Regine Elizabeth’
in villa sive soca de Hornecastell in com’ Lincoln’ et successorib’s
suis, licenciam sp’alem, lib’amq’ et licitam facultatem, potestatem, et
auctoritatem h’end. recipiend. et p’quirend. eis et e’or successorib’s
imp’p’m, tam de nob’ hered’ et successorib’s n’ris q’m de alijs
quibuscumq’ p’sonis et alia p’sona quacumq’ man’ia, mesuag’, t’ras, ten’,
r’c’orias, decimas ac alia hereditamenta quecumq’ infra regnum Anglie seu
alibi infra d’nac’o’es n’ras, que non tenent’ de nob’ im’ediate in capite
vel alit’ p’ s’viciu’ militare, du’modo non excedant clar’ annuu’ valorem
quadraginta librar’, p’fatis Gub’natorib’s et successorib’s suis ut
p’fert’ p’ nos in forma p’d’c’a concess’, statuto de t’ris et ten’ ad
manu’ mortuam non ponend. aut aliquo statuto, actu, ordinac’o’e, seu
p’visione, aut aliqua alia re, causa, vel mat’ia quacumq’ in contrariu’
inde antehac h’it’, edit’, ordinat’, seu p’vis’ in aliquo non obstan’.
Et volum’ et p’ p’sentes concedim’ p’fatis modernis Gub’natorib’s q’d
h’eant et h’ebunt has l’ras n’ras patentes &c. absq’ fine seu feodo in
hanap’io &c.  IN CUJUS rei &c.  T. R. apud Westm’ xxvº die Junii.

                                               P’ Br’e de privato Sigillo.

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

                   PRINTED BY WEIR AND SON, HORNCASTLE.




FOOTNOTES.


{4a}  Taciti Breviarum Vitæ Cn. Julii Agricola. sec. xx et xxi.

{4b}  Itinerarium Curiosum, p. 28.

{5}  The Roman road from Lincoln to Horncastle did not vary materially
from the present road between these places.  Another Roman way branched
from this road at the distance of about four miles from Horncastle,
leading nearly in a straight line to Caistor, and from thence to the
Humber: it bears the name of the _High Street_, and several tumuli are to
be seen on its sides.

{6}  Leland’s Collectanea, tom 1. part 2. p. 509.

{7a}  See Appendix, No. 1.

{7b}  Adelias de Cundi was the daughter and heiress of William de Cheney,
Lord of Cavenby and Glentham in the county of Lincoln, at the time of the
conquest.  By her husband, Roger de Cundi, whom she survived, she had a
daughter and heiress Agnes, afterwards married to Walter, son of Walter
de Clifford, of Clifford Castle, in the county of Hereford.  Dugdale,
vol. ii. p. 336.  Monast. Ang. vol. ii. p. 646. a. n. 50.

{7c}  Dugdale’s Baronage, p. 39.

{8a}  Hund. Rot. 19. Hornc. Wap.

{8b}  On the eastern boundary of the parish is a place called _Hangman’s
Corner_, where those convicted of capital offences, in the court of this
manor, were executed.

{8c}  Cart. Rot. 14 et 15. H. III.

{9a}  Hund. Rot. ut antea.

{9b}  Mag. Rot. 17 H. III. Madox. collect.

{9c}  Cart. Rot. 18 Ed. 1. m. 39.

{9d}  Cart. Rot. 12. Ed. 2. no. 17.

{9e}  Pat. 14 Ric. II. pars 1. m. 3.

{9f}  The house where the bishops used to reside, a spacious structure,
but destitute of architectural merit, was situated at the north-west
corner of the ancient fortress.  It was demolished about the year 1770,
when the present manor house was erected on its scite.

{10a}  All these grants were again acknowledged, and the privileges
further extended in the sixteenth year of the reign of Charles the
second.  See Appendix, No. 2.

{10b}  Parliamentary Survey, made in the years 1647 and 1648.

{10c}  Robert Aldrich was born at Burnham in Buckinghamshire, educated at
Eton, and elected a scholar of King’s college, Cambridge, in 1507, where
he took the degree of M.A. afterwards became proctor of the university,
schoolmaster of Eton, fellow of the college, and at length provost.  In
1523 he was one of those who were sent out by the university of Cambridge
to preach in different parts of the nation, as the judges now go their
circuits.  In 1529 he retired to Oxford, where he was incorporated B.D.
About the same time he was made archdeacon of Colchester.  In 1534 he was
installed canon of Windsor, and the same year he was appointed register
of the most noble order of the garter.  July 18, 1537, he was consecrated
bishop of Carlisle.  He was a correspondent of Erasmus, who termed him
when young, “blandæ eloquentiæ juvenis,” and appears to have associated
with him during his residence at Cambridge.  Leland was his familiar
acquaintance, and gives him a high character for parts and learning.  He
was the author of a volume of epigrams, and several theological
treatises.

{10d}  Memoirs of Sir Henry Fynes Clinton, Annual Register 1772,
Characters, p. 2.

{11}  See Appendix, No. 3.

{13}  Clarendon, Rapin, and Hume.

{14a}  Ludlow’s Memoirs.

{14b}  Vicars’s Parliamentary Chronicle.

{14c}  Colonel Russel’s.

{17}  Vicars’s Parliamentary Chronicle.

{18}  Vicars’s Parliamentary Chronicle.

{19a}  Intercepted letter from Sir William Widdrington.  Rushworth’s
Collections, 8vo. edit. vol. v. 78.

{19b}  Ibid.

{19c}  Vicars’s Parliamentary Chronicle.

{20a}  Vicars’s Parliamentary Chronicle.

{20b}  Some say this was a Captain Portington, who afterwards told
Cromwell that he aimed at his nose, when he hit his horse on the head.
Life of Cromwell.  See also Ludlow, Vicars, and Hume.

{21a}  The road adjoining to Winceby field bears the name of _Slash
Lane_, where it is traditionally related great numbers of the royal army
were slaughtered, owing to their retreat being obstructed by a closed
gate.

{21b}  Vicars’s Parliamentary Chronicle.

{22a}  Vicars’s Parliamentary Chronicle.

{22b}  Ibid.

{23a}  This anecdote the author has repeatedly heard from the several of
the old inhabitants of the town.

{23b}  October 11, 1643.

{23c}  It is said accompanied by Sir William Widdrington.  Rapin.

{25}  Dr. Stukeley has incorrectly described this fortress as a complete
parallelogram: Gough, too has erroneously stated it to have enclosed
twenty acres.  The track of the wall will be found on the modern plan of
the town.

{26}  The Roman youth were first instructed in the game of Troy Town by
Ascanius, called also Julus, the son of Æneas, and from him the maze in
which it was performed took the name of Julian Bower.  A very animated
description of this game is given by Virgil in the fifth book of his
Æneid.  See also Stukeley’s Itinerarium Curiosum, p. 91.

{29a}  “Ecclesia de Horne Caster, & de Askeby, & de superiore Toynton, &
de Mering, et de Hinderby sunt de donacoe d’ni Regis, & Osbertus Persona
tenet eas de dono Regis Ricardi.”  Testa de Nevill.

{29b}  See the note in page 31.

{30a}  This shield is merely painted in a cavity where a brass has been
fixed.

{30b}  In the Harleian collection of manuscripts, in the British Museum,
is a volume of Lincolnshire Church Notes, taken about the year 1640, by
Mr. Gervase Holles, a native of Great Grimsby, and a representative of
that place in several parliaments.  Beside noticing the above monument
and epitaph, it contains the following account of arms and inscriptions
at that time in this church, not a vestige of which is now remaining.

                      _In Fenestra Insulæ borealis_.

Orate pro a’ia Thomæ Coppuldike Armig. & D’næ Margaretæ Consortis suæ
fundatoris Gildæ Cantar . . . Fenestram fieri fecit Ano Dni. 1526.

              _In superiori Fenestra boreali Cancelli_.
G a Lyon passant guardant Arg.
Sa. 3 Flowres de lize betw: 6 Crosses botony fitchy
Arg.
G. a Crosse sarcely Arg.                                Beke.
              _In Fenestra Orientali Insulæ Australis_.

Orate pro benefactoribus artis sutorum, qui istam Fenestram fieri
fecerunt sc’æ Nenianæ cum sera & catena.  Item sc’i Crispinus &
Crispinianus cum instrumentis Calceariis.
                    _Fenestræ borealis superius_.
Empaled.  Sa. 2 lyons passant arg. crowned or           Dymoke
Empaled.  Or a lyon ramp double queue sa                Welles.
Empaled.  Quarterly.  Arg. a chevron betw. 3 bulles     Tourney.
passant sa
Empaled.  Quarterly.  B. a fesse betw. 3 goates heads
erased arg.
Empaled.  Quarterly.  Argent a chevron gobony sa.

Empaled.  Quarterly.  Arg. on a bend G. 3 roses arg.
Quarterly.  Arg. a chevron betw. 3 griphons heades      Tilney.
erased G.
Quarterly.  Arg. 3 bars G, over all a bend engrayled    Ros.
sa
Quarterly.  Quarterly or and G. a border sa. bezanty    Rochford.
Quarterly.  Arg. 3 crosses botony fitchy B. semy of
flowres de lize
Quarterly Ermine and chequy or and G.                   Gipthorpe.
Arg. a chevron betw. 3. roses G.
Taylboys, &c.
                    _Fenestra Australis superior_.
G. a fesse betw. 3 waterbougets ermine                  Meres.
Empaled.  Marchants Marke

Empaled.  Arg. on a bend G. 3 ferniers of the first

Hic jacet Francisca filia primogenita Petri Frescheville de Staveley in
Com. Derb. Arm. [ex priore uxore sua Elizabetha filia Gervasii Clifton de
Clifton in Com. Nott. Militis] et quondam Uxor Gervasii Holles de Burgh
in Com. Lincoln.  Militis, cui peperit Freschevillum Holles, & Margaretam
gemellos, & Franciscum Holles filium juniorem.  Obijt Horncastell.

                                            Harleian MS. No. 6829, p. 241.

{32}  It is observable that Cromwell is here stiled the arch-rebel,
although at the time mentioned he was only a colonel, and by no means an
illustrious individual in the war.  The date given to the battle is
wrong, it having been fought on the 11th of October; and the signal
defeat of the royalists is diminished in its importance, by stiling the
conflict a skirmish.

{35}  See Appendix, No. 4.

{37}  The same Act also empowered the commissioners of the river Witham,
in conjunction with the Horncastle and Sleaford Navigation Companies, to
complete the navigable communication between the Witham and the Fosdike
canal through the High Bridge at Lincoln.

{39}  “Horne Castelle, as far as I can lerne, is now most builded withyn
the Circuite of an old waullid Toune, or sum hughe Castel, as apperith
from divers Ruines of a Waulle.  It hath one faire Paroche Chirch.
Alluitur Bano et Verino qui paulo infra op Banum.  Dr. Thybleby of the
Queen’s College hath Landes aboute the olde Walles of Horne Castelle.
Warig risith of divers springis aliquot passuum millibus ab oppido.  Pons
ibidem super Verinum flu.  The market is very good and quick occupiers in
the town.”  Leland’s Itinerary, vol. 7. p. 51.

{41} William Banks, Esq. father of the present lessee.

{43} See Appendix, No. 1.

{44a}  Mr. Holles, in the Church Notes before quoted, mentions the
following inscription at this place, which now no longer exists:

                              _On a Gravestone_.

    “Hic jacet Gulielmus Brackenburgh, & Emmotta uxor ejus, qui quidem
    Gulielmus obiit 6 die Januarii An’o D’ni 1476 quorum a’iabus
    p’pitietur Deus Amen.

    “The pictures of themselves upon the stone, & of ten children, all in
    brasse.”

                                            Harleian MS. No. 6829, p. 177.

{44b}  Mr. Holles notices the following arms and inscriptions on the
bells, in this church, the first of which are now gone, the latter still
remaining:

                          _Fenes. boreal. Cancelli_.

    Sa. a crosse betw. 4 cinquefoyles arg

                                  _Campane_.

    [1]  Sit nomen Domini benedictum.

    [2]  Intonat e cœlis vox campana Michaelis.

    [3] Sum rosa pulsata mundi Maria vocata.

                                                             Ibid. p. 342.

{46}  Mr. Holles notices the following arms once in this church, but now
gone:

                    _Fenestra australes Cancelli_.
G. 3 lyons passant gardant or                           England.
Verry a fesse G. fretty or                              Marmyon.
Argent a plaine crosse B.
Or a lyon rampant purpure                               Lacy.
Chequy or & G. a chiefe ermyne                          Tateshale.
                           _In Campanili_.
Arg. a sword sheathed proper, a buckler appt. with
girdle wrapped, hilte pomel, & neuf or

                                            Harleian MS. No. 6829. p. 244.

{47}  In the windows were the following arms when this church was visited
by Mr. Holles:

                         _In Fenestris Cancelli_.

Verry a fesse G. fretty d’or                         Marmion.
G. a crosse sarcely arg.                             Beke.
Sa. 2 lyons passant arg. crowned or                  Dymoke.
Or a lyon rampant double queue sa.                   Welles.
Sa. 3 flowres de lize betw. 6 crosse crosselets
fitchy arg.
G. 3 bars ermyne                                     Kirketon.
Barry of 6 or and sa.
                         _Fenestræ boreales_.
B. a lyons head erased betw. 6 crosses botony arg.   Touthby.
Arg. 2 bars G. a border sa.
Dymoke each lyon charg’d sur l’espale with an        Dymoke.
annulet
Ermyne on a bend G. a cinquefoil or
G. crosse crucilly fitchy a lyon rampant arg.        La Warre.
Or a lyon rampant double queue sa.                   Welles.
                        _Fenestræ australes_.
G. 3 waterbougets arg.                               Ros.
Or on fesse G. 3 plates                              Huntingfield.
Quarterly or & G. a border sa. bezanty               Rochfort.
Rochfort with a garbe in the 2d quarter arg.         Rochfort.
Rochfort with an annulet in the 2d quarter arg.      Rochfort.
Or a manche G.                                       Hastings.
G. a bend ermyne                                     Ry.
Rochfort with an eagle displayed in the 2d quarter   Rochford.
arg
Arg. fretty of 6 pieces G. a canton ermyne
                    _In Fenestra borealis Navis_.
G. crosse crucilly fitchy a lyon rampant arg         La Warre.
Arg. on a bend G. 3 gryphons heads erased or
                           _In Campanili_.

                        Joh’es Staines W. Jo.

                                            Harleian MS. No. 6829, p. 245.

{49}  The following arms and inscriptions, now gone, are noticed by Mr.
Holles, as being in this church when visited by him:

                       _In Fenestra Australi_.
Empaled.  Arg. a crosse sa.
Empaled.  Arg. on a crosse G. a bezant
Empaled.  Arg. a crosse sa.
Empaled.  Quarterly arg. and G. on the 1st & 4th
quarters a popinjay vert. membred and beked G,
         _In Fenestra Occidental_, _ex sinistra Campanilis_.
Orate pro a’ia Joh’is Tott, Agnet, & Helene uxorum ejus, &
specialiter pro Andrea Tott Artium Baccalaureo, qui istam Fenestram
lapidari, nec non vitreari fecit.
                   _Sup Fulchrum ex p’te Australi_.
Quarterly Ufford & Beke                                 Willughby.
3 Crosses portate
2 Chevrons betw. 3 roses
A crosse
A lyon passant
Domus mea domus Orationis vocabitur.  1591.

                                            Harleian MS. No. 6829. p. 218.

{50}  By the following extract it appears that in the time of Mr. Holles,
the windows of this church abounded with stained glass, of which not a
single vestige is now remaining.

                  _In Fenestris Orientali Cancelli_.
Quarterly.  Verry a fesse G. fretty d’or        Marmyon.
Quarterly.  Sa. 2 lyons passant arg. crowned    Dymoke.
d’or
Empaled.  G. a frett of 8 pieces d’or
Empaled.  B. 3 garbes d’or
G. a lyon rampant d’or
Sa. a sword in pale arg.
Sa. 2 lyons passants arg. crowned d’or          Dimoke.
Arg. 3 flowres de lize betw: 6 crosse           Hillary.
crosselets fitchy sa. a border G.
Arg. a playne crosse G.
G. a playne crosse arg.
                          _Tumulus lapidus_.

Hic jacet Anna fillia Thomæ Dymoke Militis D’ni . . . et Margaretis
consortis suæ quæ obiit Ao. D’ni 1462 &c. &c.
Empaled.  Verry a fesse G. fretty d’or          Marmion.
Empaled.  Or a lyon rampant double queue sa.    Welles.
                     _In muro boreali eræ sculptum_.

    Orate pro a’ia M’ri. Joh’is de Croxby, quondam Rectoris istius
    ecclesiæ, qui dedit annualem redditum xx_s._ annuatim impetuum,
    et in secunda feria primæ hebdommadæ quadragessimæ habitantibus
    in Conningsby sc’am formam evidentiæ suæ distribuendorum.

    This charity hath ceased for many yeares, the evidence having
    been sacrilegiously stolne out of that monument within the wall,
    as by the loosening of the plate of brasse may appeare.
            _In Fenestra Occidentali Capellæ Orientalis_.

  Orate pro a’iabus . . . Hatcliffe . . . Uxis suæ . . . Fenestram.
Sa. 3 welles arg. bis                           Wellis.
Empaled.  Sa. 3 welles arg.                     Wellis.
Empaled.  B. 2 bars d’or over all a lyon        Hatcliffe.
rampant G.
Sa a. sword in pale arg.
Arg. a fesse daunce betw. 3 talbots heads
erased sa.
Arg. a fesse betw. 3 cootes sa
B. 2 bars d’or over all a lyon rampant G.       Hattecliffe.
Orate pro bono statu H. Wellis notoria          Hatcliffe uxoris suæ
publici et sequelis eorum . . . hanc
fenestram fieri fecerunt A’no D’ni 1460.
               _In superioribus Fenestris Borealibus_.
G. a cinquefoil peirced betw. 8 crosse          Umframville
crosselets d’or
Quarterly.  Sa. a cross            Ufford.      Willughby.
engrayled d’or
Quarterly.  G. a crosse sarcely    Beke         Willughby.
arg.
G. 3 waterbougets arg.                          Ros.
Or a lyon rampant double queue sa.              Welles.
Arg. a crosse patonce G.
Arg. a chiefe G. over all a bend engrayled B.
Chequy or & G. a chiefe ermyne                  Tateshale.
Ermyne a fesse G.                               Bernake.
Arg. a chiefe G. over all a bend B.             Crumwell.
Sa. 2 lyons passant arg. crowned or             Dymoke.
Or on fesse G. 3 plates                         Huntingfield.
Quarterly or & G. a border sa. bezanty          Rochford.
G. a crosse molyn arg.                          Beke.
Quarterly or & G. a border sa. bezanty on the   Rochford.
2d quarter a garbe arg.
Quarterly &c. an annulet on the 2d quarter      Rochford.
B. crucilly a lyon rampant arg. bis
Argent 3 shell snayles sa.
Dymoke Crumwell Holland
Quarterly France & England a label of 3 arg.
Quarterly France & England a label of 3
ermyne

                         _In Fenestra Orientali_.

Orate pro a’iabus fratrum, & sororum Gildæ be’æ Mariæ de Cuningsby, qui
istam fenestram fieri fecerunt.

This is a fayre Window, adorned with the Genealogy of the Kinges of
Israel and Judah, David lying along through the whole bottome, from whose
roote branch out the several stems.  In one part of it below the Picture
of King Edward the first, crowned, &c. &c.

                      Edwardus primus regnavit annos

Orate pro Matilda de Padeholme, et Alicia

                            _On a Gravestone_.

Hic jacet D’nus Thomas Butler, quondam Capellanus Gilde beæ Mariæ
Cunningsby, qui obiit 10 die Mensis Decembris, A’no D’ni 1510.  Cujus aiæ
&c. &c.

                              _On another_.

Pray for the Soule of John Smith of Cunsby sometimes M’chant of the
Staple of Calis, which died in the yeare of our Lord God 1470, & Jonet
his Wife which died the 24th Day of November in the yeare of our Lord God
1461.

And all good people that this Scripture reade or see

For theire soules say a Paternoster, Ave-Maria, & a creed for Charity.

On another the pourtraytures of a man and his two wives on either side of
him in brasse with this inscription vizt.

Pray for the soules of Richard Whetecroft of Coningsby M’chant of the
Staple at Calice & sometimes Lieutenant of the same, & Jane & Margaret
his Wives, which Richard deceased the 23d day of November, Ao. D’ni 1524.

               _In the Parlour of the Parsonage House_.
Arg. a crosse engrailed G. betw. 4 waterbougets sa.     Bourchier.
Quarterly & Quartered with Quarterly.  Gules billetty   Lovayne.
d’or a fesse arg.
Quarterly & Quartered with Quarterly.  Crumwell and
Tateshale
B. a manche d’or
Empaled.  Sa. 3 lyons passant guardant arg.             Dymoke.
Empaled.  Sa. 2 lyons passant arg. crowned d’or
Empaled.  Dymoke
Empaled.  Marmyon
Verry a fesse G.                                        Marmyon.
Or a lyon rampant double queue sa.                      Welles.
Empaled.  A coate defaced
Empaled.  Welles
Empaled.  Verry a fesse G.
Empaled.  B. a manche d’or

All these Escocheons are in 2 Windowes, in which two Windowes also are
these Verses:

   Alme Deus cœli Croxby tu parce Johanni
   Hanc ædem fieri benefecit sponte Jo. Croxby
   Anno Milleno quater. c. L. x. quoq. terno.

                       _In the other Windowes_.
Barry of 6 ermyne & G. 3 crescents sa.                  Waterton.
Quarterly Ufford & Beke                                 Willughby.
Verry a fesse G.                                        Marmyon.
Ermyne 5 fusils in fesse G.                             Hebden.
Arg. a crosse sarcely sa.
Empaled.  Quarterly Crumwell & Tateshale                Crumwell.
Empaled.  B. a fesse betw. 6 billets d’or               Deyncourt.
Empaled.  Dymoke
Empaled.  Welles
Sa. an arming sworde pile in poynte arg.
Empaled.  Arg. 3 bulls passant
Empaled.  G. on a chevron arg. 3 pomeis
Empaled.  Arg. a fesse daunce betw. 3 talbots heades
erased sa.
Empaled.  Arg. a fesse betw. 3 cootes sa.

                                     Harleian MS. No. 6829. p. 179 to 182.

{54}  Harleian MS. No. 618.  Parliamentary Returns.

{55}  “In Badeburg h’b. h’b.  Vlf XII car. t’ræ ad g’ld.  T’ra x car.
Ibi h’t Gislebt v car. et XXI vill. et VI bord. et XX soch. et XVI bord.
eor.  Int. om’s VI car, et I molin. VIII solid CXL ac’s silvæ pastil. T R
E. val. X lib.  † mº. XII lib. Tallia in lib. De hoe t’ra VI car. in
Soca.”  Domesday, folio 354.

{56a}  Burton’s Monast. Ebor. p. 215.

{56b}  The following arms and inscription, now gone, were in this church
when it was visited by Mr. Holles.

                            _In Fenestra_.
Arg. a plaine crosse G.
G. a fesse betw. 6 cosselets botony fitchy arg. charged
with as many mullets or pierced G.
Sa. a bend betw. 6 mullets or pierced G.                   Briton.
     _In the Church on a flat marble stone in Saxon Characters_.

ICI : GIST : MARGARETA : DE : LACI : QE : FVLA : FEME : GWILLEAMA :
DE : MOVSTE

                                            Harleian MS. No. 6829, p. 177.

{57}  See Appendix, No. 1.

{58a}  Escheat Rolls.

{58b}  Cook C. Herald, MS.

{58c}  From the information of E. Turnor, Esq. F.S.A.

{60a}  Lodge’s Illustrations, vol. ii. 191.

{60b}  The windows were formerly embellished with the following heraldic
bearings in stained glass, of which no vestiges are now existing.

                 _In Boreali Fenestra Chori_.
Arg. 3 chaplets with roses gules                  Lascels.
G. 3 mascels argent
G. 4 fusils in fesse arg. a border engrailed or   Nevill.

                                            Harleian MS. No. 6829. p. 140.

{62}  See Appendix, No. 1.

{63a}  For a description of the ceremony performed by the king’s champion
at coronations, see “Sandford’s History of the Coronation of James the
second;” also “Banks’s History of the Family of Marmyun.”

{63b}  In the forty-second and forty-third years of Henry the third,
Philip Marmyon had grants of a market, fair, and free warren, at his
manor of Scrivelsby.  In the ninth year of Edward the first, he showed
that he had those rights, and that of gallows at Scrivelsby, with the
other privileges incident to one of the great barons of the realm; and
also right of free warren in the soke of Horncastle.

{64}  In this inscription Sir Robert Dymoke is, by mistake of the
sculptor, styled _knight and baronet_, instead of _knight banneret_.

{69}  “Vir illustris in consilio, strenuus in prælio, princeps militæ in
Angliæ, et in omni regno ornatissimus.”  Wever’s Fun. Mem. p. 366.

{71}  The MS. vol. of Church notes, so often before quoted, contains the
following description of this castle:—

    “The castle of Bullingbrooke was built by William de Romara Earle of
    Lincolne, and ennobled by the birth of King Henry the 4th, who from
    thence took his sirname.  Heretofore it was a famous structure, but
    now gone much to ruine and decay.

    “The towne standes in a bottome, and the castell in the lowest part
    of it, compassed about with a large moat fed by springs.  It is most
    accessible on the south-west part, the rest being encompassed by the
    hills.

    “As for the frame of the building, it lieth in a square, the area
    within the walls conteyning about an acre and a half, the building is
    very uniforme.

    “It hath 4 stronge forts or ramparts, wherein are many roomes, and
    lodgings: the passage from one to another lying upon the walles,
    which are embattled about.  There be likewise 2 watch-towers all
    covered with lead.  If all the roomes in it were repayred, and
    furnished [as it seemes in former tymes they have bin] it were
    capable to receyve a very great prince with all his trayne.

    “The entrance into it is very stately over a faire draw-bridge.  The
    gatehouse a very uniforme, and strong building.  Next within the
    porter’s lodge is a payre of low stayres, which goe downe into a
    dungeon, in which some reliques are yet to be seene of a
    prison-house.  Other 2 prisons more are on either side.

    “The building itselfe is of a sandy stone hewen of a great square out
    of the rockes thereby, which though it abide the weather longe, yet
    [in processe of tyme] it will moulder, especially if wett gett within
    it, which hath bin the decay of many places of the wall where the
    roofe is uncovered.

    “There be certaine roomes within the castle, [built by Queen
    Elizabeth of freestone] amongst which is a fayre great chamber with
    other lodgings.

    “In a roome in one of the towers of the castle they usually kept
    their auditt once by the yeare for the whole Dutchy of Lancaster,
    having ever bin the prime seate thereof, where all the recordes for
    the whole countrey are kept.

    “The constable of the castle is Sir William Mounson Lord Castlemayne,
    who receaveth a revenue out of the Dutchy lands of £500. per annum,
    in part of payment of £1000. yearely given by the king to the
    Countesse of Nottingham his lady.

    “One thinge is not to be passed by affirmed as a certaine trueth by
    many of the inhabitants of the towne upon their owne knowledge, which
    is, that the castle is haunted by a certain spirit in the likenesse
    of a hare; which att the meeting of the auditors doeth usually runne
    betweene their legs, and sometymes overthrows them, and soe passes
    away.  They have pursued it downe into the castleyard, and seene it
    take in att a grate into a low cellar, and have followed it thither
    with a light, where notwithstanding that they did most narrowly
    observe it [and that there was noe other passage out, but by the
    doore, or windowe, the roome being all close framed of stones within,
    not having the least chinke or crevice] yet they could never finde
    it.  And att other tymes it hath been seene run in at iron-grates
    below into other of the grotto’s [as their be many of them] and they
    have watched the place, and sent for houndes, and put in after it;
    but after a while they have come crying out.”

                                            Harleian MS. No. 6829, p. 162.

{73}  The following arms and inscriptions were in the windows of this
church when it was visited by Mr. Holles.

                  _In Fenestra Orientali Cancelli_.
G. 3 lyons passants gardants d’or a labell of   Comes Lancastr.
3 each charged with 3 floures de lize of the
second
Empaled.  Castile, and Leon quarterly.  A
label of 3 arg. each charged with 2 de lizes
sa.
Empaled.  France, and England quarterly.  A
label of 3 arg. each charged with 2 de lizes
sa.
Or a lyon rampant purpure                       Lacy.
B. 2 garbes d’or                                Meschines.  Com.
                                                Cestr.
Quarterly.  Sa. a crosse            Ufford
engrayled d’or
Quarterly.  G. a crosse molyn       Beke        Willughby.
arg.
Argent a fesse G between 3 bugles trippant
sa.
              _In Fenestra Orientali ad dextram Navis_.
B. 6. lyoncels rampant d’or. 3. 2. 1            Longespee.
Lancaster.

England, and France quarterly.

Lacy.

G. 3 lyons passants arg. a labell of 3 d’or,
each charged with a lyon rampant purpure
                   _In_ 1_ma_ _Fenestra australi_.
B. 3. garbes d’or                               Meschines.
Chequy d’or & B a bend G.                       Clifford.
Quarterly arg. & G. the 2d & 3d charg’d with    Spenser.
a frette d’or over all a bend sa.
Femina gestans in veste sex leones aureos       Longespee.
erectos una cum leone purpure conjunctos
                                                Lacy.
                   _In_ 2_da_ _Fenestra australi_.
G. a fesse verry betw: 3 leopards heads         Cantilupe.
jesant floures de lize d’or
G. a crosse molyn arg.                          Beke.
B. a fesse daunce betw: 10 billets d’or         Deyncourt.
                           _In Campanili_.
Quarterly France, and England
Quarterly or, & G. a border sa. bezanty         Rochford.
Or, a chevron betw: 10 crosses botony sa.       Slight.
Orate pro bono statu . . . Ducis Aurelie.  Ad hoc Campanile . . . Ao.
r. r. Hen
Quarterly.  Arg. a chevron betw: 3 martlets
sa.
Quarterly.  Chequy or & G. on a chiefe arg. a
lyon passant sa.

                                            Harleian MS. No. 6829. p. 163.

{74}  “In Bolinbroc h’b Stori II car. t’ræ ad g’ld.  T’ra II car.  In
soca I car. de hac t’ra.  Ibi h’t Iuo modo II car. et XII vill. et VIII
bord. et XII soch. cu. III car.  Ibi æccla et mercatu. novu. et III
molini X solidos et LXX ac. p’ti.  T R E. val. XXX lib. mº. XL. lib.
Tailla q’ter XX lib. cu. omnib’s adjacentib’s.”  Domesday folio, 351.

{76}  See the Charter in Dugdale’s Monasticon, vol. i. p. 822.

{79}  Stukeley’s Itinerarium Curiosum, p. 28.

{81}  Dr. John Taylor of Norwich was one of the earliest ministers
appointed by Mr. Disney.  He held his appointment from about 1715, for 18
years, and at this place composed his justly valued “Hebrew Concordance,”
in two vols. folio.

{86a}  Itinerarium, p. 162.

{86b}  Gough, and others who have copied from him, erroneously state this
tower to be two hundred feet in height.

{90}  The principal part of the stained glass taken from this church was
placed by the Earl of Exeter in the church of St. Martin, Stamford Baron,
with some other richly stained glass, procured from the churches of Snape
in Yorkshire, and Barnack in Northamptonshire.

{91a}  Joan Lady Cromwell was one of the daughters of Sir Richard
Stanhope, and niece and co-heiress of the Lord Treasurer Cromwell.  She
married Humphry Bourchier, third Son of the Earl of Essex, who was
created Lord Cromwell, in the first year of Edward the fourth.

{91b}  Matilda Lady Willoughby was the other daughter of Sir Richard
Stanhope, and niece and co-heiress of the Lord Treasurer Cromwell.

{92a}  Gough in his “Sepulchral Monuments,” vol. ii. gives a description
of the arms contained in these shields, as well as in those which were
attached to the figures of the Lord Treasurer and his wife.  His
description however differs widely from that given by Mr. Holles in his
MS. vol. of Lincolnshire Church Notes.

{92b}  Sepulchral Monuments, vol. ii. p. 179.

{92c}  The MS. volume of Lincolnshire Church Notes, notices all the
foregoing inscriptions, though not in a very correct manner.  It also
contains the following account of inscriptions and arms, in this church,
which are now gone:

                   _In the upper ende of the Chancell_.

Next under another fayre monument of blew marble [as the former] the
picture of one also inlayd in brasse, adorned rounde about with a border
of curious workemanship in brasse, with the pictures and names of some
prophets in the Old Testament, and of other saintes, and some Saxon
kinges, as Edmund, Edward, Etheldred, Ethelbert, there is noe
inscription, onely this ensuing escocheon upon either side of him.

                            [Picture: Shield]

                   _On the North Side under a Marble_.

Orate pro a’ia M’ri Joh’is Gigur baccalaur.  Theologiæ custodis hujus
collegii, ac etiam . . . Collegij Marton in Oxonia qui obijt 12º. die

 _On the Wood Worke in the lower ende of the Quire_, _curiously carved in
                           capital l’rs this_,—

Ad honorem & gloriam Dei opt. Max. & decorum domus ejus hoc opus factum
est Anno D’ni 1424.

                             _In Fenestris_.

The history of the passion depainted.  In another Hell’s torments, where
are divers creatures bound together in a chayne; amongst whome one with a
crowne, another with a mytre on his head, the divell tormenting them, and
under them is written—

               ‘Sic affiguntur pœnis, qui prava sequuntur.’

The history of Hermogenes that raysed up devills, and of Guthlake [the
saint of the fens] and of Catherina, who cast them into the sea, that
Hermogenes and Philetus raysed.

The history of Cosdre with his decollation.

                  _In Fenestris ex latere Australi_.
Arg. a chiefe G. surtout a bend B.        Crumwell.
Quarterly.—Crumwell, with chequy d’or     Tateshall.
and G. a chiefe ermyne
G. a lyon rampant d’or                    Fitz-Alane.
Arg. 3 cinquefoyles and a canton          Driby.
Bendy of 10 pieces arg. and G.
Ermyne a fesse G.                         Bernake.
B. a fesse daunce betw: 10 billets d’or   Deyncourt.
G. 10 annulets d’or
Chequy d’or and G. a bend ermyne          Clifton.
Quarterly.—Crumwell and Tateshall
Empaled.  Arg. a chiefe G. surtout a      Crumwell.
bend B.
Empaled.  Arg. a chevron B. a file with
3 lambeaux d’or
Barry of 6 arg. and B. a bend G.          Grey of Rotterfield.
Verry a fesse                             Marmyon.
Arg. a chiefe G. surtout a bend B. a
labell of 3 ermyne
Lozengy arg. and G.                       Fitz-William.
                         _Ex latere boreali_.
Empaled.  Chequy d’or and G. a bendlet
B.
Empaled.  Lozengy arg. and G.             Fitz-William.
B. a crosse patonce arg.
Party p. pale G. and sa. a lyon rampant
arg. crowned d’or
Arg. 3 water-pots covered G. a border     Monboucher. [ut upinor.]
sa. bezanty
Empaled.  Arg. a chiefe G. over all a
bend B.
Empaled.  Party p. pale G and sa. a
lyon rampant arg. crowned d’or
Arg. a chevron betweene 3 pots covered
G. a border sa. bezanty.
Arg. a chiefe G. surtout a bend B. a
labell of 3 d’or
Barry of 6 arg. and G. a bend engrayled
d’or
Crumwell with a labell of 3 ermyne
      _In Fenestris utrimq. supra portas Australem et Borealem_.
Orate pro a’ia Radulphi nuper D’ni de Crumwell & Tateshale
Thesaurarij Angliæ, & fundatoris hujus Collegij.
                       _The Roode Loft_, 1524.
G. a saltier arg. a file with 3           Nevile.
lambeaux B.
Lozengy sa. and erm. on a chiefe sa. 3    Wainflet Ep’us Wint.
lillies arg.
Wainflet Ep’us Winton cujus insignia sculptata sup. utranq. porticum
in saxo.

Thomas Howard gen. & Beatrix consors ejus vitriaverunt fenestram
borealem in honore s’cæ Catherinæ, cujus passio ib’dm.
Empaled.  Arg. a chevron chequy d’or
and G. betw. 3 flesh-hookes sa.
Empaled.  B. a fesse betw. 3 storkes
arg.
Arg. a chevron betw. 3 catherine wheels
d’or
Deyncourt sup. portam collegii.
Sup. crucem in foro ville Crumwell & Tateshall paling Deyncourt & p.
se 3.

                       _Gravestones in the Church_.

Hic jacet Thomas Gibbon Artium Liberalium M’gr. Rector nuper de Wiberton
Socius & precentor hujus collegij qui obijt 16º. die mensis Januarij An’o
D’ni 1506 cujus &c.

                                _Another_.

Orate pro a’ia D’ni Henr. Porter capti quondam Socij Collegij de
Tateshall, ac præcentor ejusdem Eccl’ie, qui obijt 12º. die Martij An’o
D’ni 1519.

                                _Another_.

Hic jacet Edwardus Okey nup. unus sex clericorum hujus Collegij qui obijt
29 die January An’o D’ni 1519, cujus &c.

                          _In Insula Australi_.

Hic jacet Ric’us English artium liberalium Mgr. socius ac p’centor huj.
Collegij & Vicarius Eccl’iæ de Burwell qui obijt 27º. die Martij A’o D’ni
1522.

                                _Another_.

Orate pro a’ia M’ri Rob’ti Sudbury sacræ Theologiæ Baccalaureus nuper
Rector . . . ac quondam p’centor & socius hujus Collegij qui obijt 19º.
Decembris An’o 1482.

 _Under the arched worke of the Partition betw. the Chancell and the body
                         of the Church_, _this_,

Orate pro a’ia Rob’ti de Whalley . . . hujus collegij qui hoc opus fieri
fecit A’o D’ni 1528. cujus a’ie p’pitietur Deus.  Amen.

  _Within a Chapel on the North side_, _a fayre flatt Marble_, _on which
                              this Epitaph_,

   Have mercy on the soule [good Lord] we thee pray
   Of Edward Hevyn, lay’d here in sepulture,
   W’ch to thine honour this chappel did array
   With ceeling, desk, perclose and pourtrayture,
   And paviment of marble long to endure.
   Servant of late to the excellent Princesse
   Mother to King Henry, of Richmond Countesse.

                  _The Armes on the Gravestone are_
Empaled.  A chevron betw. 3 boares heades couped, having    Hevyn.
so many pomeis in their mouths; on the chevron a crescent
Empaled.  A chevron betw. 3 bulls heades.                   Hevyn.

                                        Harleian MS. No. 6829. p. 184–189.

{97}  “One of the Cromwelle’s builded a preaty turret caullid the Tour of
the Moore; and thereby he made a faire greate ponde or lake, brickid
about.  The lake is commonly caullid the Synkker.”  Leland’s Itinerarium,
vi. 58.

{100a}  By some called _Bind_, by others _Clunch Clay_.

{100b}  At Donington, 103 yards; and at Kirkstead, 150 yards.  A succinct
account of the boring at Donington may be seen in the Transactions of the
Geological Society, vol. 3.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORICAL AND DESCRIPTIVE SKETCHES
OF THE TOWN AND SOKE OF HORNCASTLE [1820]***


******* This file should be named 64182-0.txt or 64182-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/6/4/1/8/64182


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

